Lodusky~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lodusky, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lodusky

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Release Date: November 4, 2007 [EBook #23327]
Last Updated: March 2, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LODUSKY ***




Produced by David Widger






LODUSKY

By Frances Hodgson Burnett

Copyright, 1877


They were rather an incongruous element amid the festivities, but
they bore themselves very well, notwithstanding, and seemed to be
sufficiently interested. The elder of the two--a tall, slender,
middle-aged woman, with a somewhat severe, though delicate face--sat
quietly apart, looking on at the rough dances and games with a keen
relish of their primitive uncouthness; but the younger, a slight, alert
creature, moved here and there, her large, changeable eyes looking
larger through their glow of excitement.

“Thet gal thar,” drawled a tall mountaineer who supported himself
against the chimney and spat with placid regularity into the fire. “They
tell me thet gal thar hes writ things as hes been in print. They say
she's powerful smart--arns her livin' by it. 'T least thet's what Jake
Harney says, 'n they's a-boardin' at Harney's. The old woman's some of
her kin, 'n' goes 'long with her when she travels 'round.”

There was one fiddler at work sawing industriously at one tune which did
good service throughout the entertainment; there was a little furious
and erratic reel-dancing, and much loud laughter, and good-natured, even
if somewhat personal, jest. The room was one of two which formed the
house; the walls were of log; the lights the cheery yellow flare of
great pine-knots flung one after the other upon the embers.

“I am glad I thought of North Carolina,” Rebecca Noble said to herself.
“There is a strong hint of Rembrandt in this,--the bright yellow light,
the uncouth figures. Ah! who is that?”

A short time after, she made her way through the crowd to her relative's
corner among the shadows. She looked eager and excited, and spoke in a
quick, breathless fashion.

“I want to show you something, if you have not already seen it,” she
said. “There is in this room, Aunt Miriam, the most wonderful creature
your eyes ever rested on! You must prepare yourself to be startled. Look
toward the door--at that tall girl standing with her hands behind her.”

She was attired in a calico of flaunting pattern, and leaned against the
log wall in an indifferent attitude, regarding the company from under
the heavy lashes of her eyes, which had a look of stillness in them
which was yet not repose. There was something even secretive in her
expression, as if she watched them furtively for reasons of her own.
At her side stood a big, discontented-looking young man, who confronted
aggressively two or three other young men equally big, if not equally
discontented, who seemed to be arguing some point with him and
endeavoring to engage the attention of his companion. The girl, however,
simply responded to their appeals with an occasional smile, ambiguous,
if not scornful.

“How I wish I could hear them!” exclaimed Miss Noble.

It was her habit to utilize any material she chanced to find, and
she had really made her summer jaunt to North Carolina in search of
material, but she was not thinking of utilizing this girl, as she
managed to keep near her during the remainder of the evening. She had
merely found something to be keenly interested in, her interest in any
human novelty being, on occasion, intense. In this case her interest
increased instead of diminished. She found the girl comporting herself
in her natural position as belle, with a calm which was slightly
suggestive of “the noble savage.” Each admirer seemed to be treated with
indifference alike, though there were some who, for reasons best known
to themselves, evidently felt that they stood more securely than the
rest. She moved through game and dance with a slow yet free grace; she
spoke seldom, and in a low, bell-like monotone, containing no hint of
any possible emotional development, and for the rest, her shadow of a
disdainful smile seemed to stand her in good stead. Clearly as she
stood out from among her companions from the first, at the close of the
evening she assumed a position actually dramatic.

The big young mountaineer, who, despite his discontent, was a very
handsome fellow indeed, had held his own against his rivals stubbornly
during the evening, but when, after the final dance, he went in search
of his charge, he found that he was not first.

She had fallen into her old attitude against the wall, her hands
behind her, and was listening to the appeal of a brawny youth with a
hunting-knife in his belt.

“Dusk,” he was saying, “I'm not such a chicken hearted chap as to let a
gal go back on me. Ye sed I mout hev yer comp'ny home, 'n' I'm a-gwine
to hev it, Dave Humes or no Dave Humes.”

Dusk merely smiled tolerantly.

“Are ye?” she said.

Rebecca Noble, who stood within a few feet of them, was sure that the
lover who approached was the Dave Humes in question, he advanced with
such an angry stride, and laying his hand on his rival's shoulder,
turned him aside so cavalierly.

“No he aint,” he put in; “not an' me about. I brought ye, an' I'll take
ye home, Lodusky, or me and him 'll settle it.”

The other advanced a step, looking a trifle pale and disheveled. He
placed himself square in front of Lodusky.

“Dusk Dunbar,” he said, “you're the one to settle it. Which on us is
a-gwine home with ye--me or him? Ye haint promised the two of us, hev
ye?”

There was certainly a suddenly lit spark of exultation in the girl's
coolly dropped eyes.

“Settle it betwixt ye,” she answered with her exasperating half smile
again.

They had attracted attention by this time, and were becoming the centre
figures of a group of lookers-on.

The first had evidently lost his temper. She was the one who should
settle it, he proclaimed loudly again. She had promised one man her
“comp'ny” and had come with another.

There was so much fierce anger in his face that Miss Noble drew a little
nearer, and felt her own blood warmed.

“Which on us is it to be?” he cried.

There was a quick, strong movement on the part of the young man Dave,
and he was whirled aside for a second time.

“It's to be me,” he was answered. “I'm the man to settle that--I don't
leave it to no gal to settle.”

In two seconds the lookers-on fell back in dismay, and there was a cry
of terror from the women. Two lithe, long-limbed figures were struggling
fiercely together, and there was a flash of knives in the air.

Rebecca Noble sprang forward.

“They will kill each other,” she said. “Stop them!”

That they would have done each other deadly injury seemed more than
probable, but there were cool heads and hands as strong as their own in
the room, and in a few minutes they had been dragged apart and stood,
each held back by the arms, staring at each other and panting. The lank
peacemaker in blue jeans who held Dave Humes shook him gently and with
amiable toleration of his folly.

“Look 'ere, boys,” he said, “this yere's all a pack of foolishness, ye
know--all a pack of foolishness. There aint no sense in it--it's jest
foolishness.”

Rebecca cast a quick glance at the girl Lodusky. She leaned against the
wall just as she had done before; she was as cool as ever, though the
spark which hinted at exultation still shone steadily in her eye.

When the two ladies reached the log-cabin at which they had taken up
their abode, they found that the story of the event of the evening was
before them. Their hostess, whose habit it was to present herself with
erratic talk or information at all hours, met them with hospitable
eagerness.

“Waal now,” she began, “jest to think o' them thar fool boys
a-lettin' into one another in thet tharway. I never hearn tell o' sich
foolishness. Young folks _is_ so foolish. 'N' they drord knives?” This
is in the tone of suggestive query.

“Yes,” answered Miss Noble, “they drew knives.”

“They did!” benignly. “Lord! What fools! Waal now, an' Dusk--what did
Dusk do?”

“She stood by and looked on,” was the reply.

“Lord!” with the inimitable mountain drawl; “ye don't say so! But it's
jest like her--thet is. She's so cur'us, Dusk is. Thar aint no gettin'
at her. Ye know the gals ses as she's allers doin' fust one quare thing
'n' then another to get the boys mad at each other. But Lor', p'r'aps
'taint so! Dusk's powerful good-lookin', and gals is jealous, ye know.”

“Do you think,” questioned Miss Noble, “that they really would have
killed each other?”

“Lord! yaas,” placidly. “They went to do it. Both Dan'l and Dave's
kinder fiery, 'n' they'd nuther on 'em hev give in with Dusk a-lookin'
on--they'd hev cut theirselves to pieces fust. Young folks _is_ so
foolish; gettin' mad about a gal! Lord knows gals is plenty enough.”

“Not girls like this one,” said Miss Noble, laughing a little.

“Waal now, she _is_ good-lookin', aint she? But she's cur'us, Dusk
is--she's a cur'us creetur.”

“Curious!” echoed Rebecca, finding the term vague even while
suggestive.

“Yaas,” she said, expansively, “she's cur'us, kinder onsosherble ''n'
notionate. Now Dusk is--cur'us. She's so still and sot, 'n' Nath Dunbar
and Mandy they think a heap on her, 'n' they do the best they kin by
her, but she don't never seem to keer about 'em no way. Fur all she's so
still, she's powerful sot on fine dressin' an' rich folkses ways. Nath
he once tuk her to Asheville, 'n' seems like she's kinder never got over
it, but keeps a-broodin' 'bout the way they done thar, 'n' how their
clothes looked, 'n' all thet. She knows she's handsum, 'n' she likes to
see other folks knows it, though she never says much. I hed to laugh at
my Hamp once; Hamp he aint no fool, an' he'd been tuk with her a spell
like the rest o' the boys, but he got chock full of her, 'n' one day
we was a-talkin,' 'n' the old man he says, 'Waal now, that gal's a hard
wad. She's cur'us, 'n' thar's no two ways about it.' An' Hamp he gives
a bit of a laugh kinder mad, 'n' he ses, 'Yes, she's cur'us--cur'us
as ----!' May be he felt kinder roughed up about her yet--but I hed to
laugh.”

The next morning Miss Noble devoted to letter-writing. In one of her
letters, a bright one, of a tone rather warmer than the rest, she gave
her correspondent a very forcible description of the entertainment of
the evening before and its closing scene.

“I think it will interest him,” she said half aloud, as she wrote upon
the envelope the first part of the address, 'Mr. Paul Lennox.'

A shadow falling across the sunshine in the door way checked her and
made her look up.

It had rather an arousing effect upon her to find herself confronting
the young woman, Lodusky, who stood upon the threshold, regarding her
with an air entirely composed, slightly mingled with interest.

“I was in at Mis' Harney's,” she remarked, as if the explanation was
upon the whole rather superfluous, “'n' I thought I'd come in 'n' see
ye.”

During her sojourn of three weeks Rebecca had learned enough of the laws
of mountain society to understand that the occasion only demanded of her
friendliness of demeanor and perfect freedom from ceremony. She rose and
placed a chair for her guest.

“I am glad to see you,” she said.

Lodusky seated herself.

It was entirely unnecessary to attempt to set her at ease; her composure
was perfect. The flaunt-ing-patterned calico must have been a matter of
full dress. It had been replaced by a blue-and-white-checked homespun
gown--a coarse cotton garment short and scant. Her feet were bare, and
their bareness was only a revelation of greater beauty, so perfect was
their arched slenderness. Miss Dunbar crossed them with unembarrassed
freedom, and looked at the stranger as if she found her worth steady
inspection.

“Thet thar's a purty dress you're a-wearin',” she vouchsafed at length.

Rebecca glanced down at her costume. Being a sensible young person, she
had attired herself in apparel suitable for mountain rambling. Her dress
was simple pilgrim gray, taut made and trim; but she never lost an air
of distinction which rendered abundant adornments a secondary matter.

“It is very plain,” she answered. “I believe its chief object; is to be
as little in the way as possible.”

“Taint much trimmed,” responded the girl, “but it looks kinder nice, 'n'
it sets well. Ye come from the city, Mis' Harney says.”

“From New York,” said Rebecca. She felt sure that she saw in the tawny
brown depths of the girl's eyes a kind of secret eagerness, and this
expressed itself openly in her reply.

“I don't blame no one fur wantin' to live in a city,” she said, with
a kind of discontent. “A body might most as soon be dead as live this
way.”

Rebecca gave her a keen glance. “Don't you like the quiet?” she asked.
“What is it you don't like?”

“I don't like nothin' about it,” scornfully. “Thar's nothin' here.”

Very slowly a lurking, half-hidden smile showed itself about her fine
mouth.

“I'm not goin' to stay here allers,” she said.

“You want to go away?” said Rebecca.

She nodded.

“I _am_ goin',” she answered, “some o' these days.”

“Where?” asked Rebecca, a little coldly, recognizing as she did a
repellant element in the girl.

The reply was succinct enough:--

“I don't know whar, 'n' I don't keer whar--but I'm goin'.”

She turned her eyes toward the great wall of forest-covered mountain,
lifting its height before the open door, and the blood showed its deep
glow upon her cheek.

“Some o' these days,” she added; “as shore as I'm a woman.”

When they talked the matter over afterward, Miss Thorne's remarks were
at once decided and severe.

“Shall I tell you what my opinion is, Rebecca?” she said. “It is my
opinion that there is evil enough in the creature to be the ruin of the
whole community. She is bad at the core.”

“I would rather believe,” said Rebecca, musingly, “that she was only
inordinately vain.” Almost instantaneously her musing was broken by a
light laugh. “She has dressed her hair as I dress mine,” she said, “only
it was done better. I could not have arranged it so well. She saw it
last night and was quick enough to take in the style at a glance.”

At the beginning of the next week there occurred an event which changed
materially the ordinary routine of life in the cabin. Heretofore the two
sojourners among the mountain fastnesses had walked and climbed under
the escort of a small tow-headed Harney. But one evening as she sat
sketching on her favorite flat seat of rock, Miss Noble somewhat alarmed
this youth by dropping her paper and starting to her feet.

“Orlander” Harney sat and stared at her with black eyes and opened
mouth. The red came and went under her fair skin, and she breathed
quickly.

“Oh,” she cried softly, “how _could_ I be mistaken!”

That she was not mistaken became evident immediately. At the very moment
she spoke, the advancing horseman, whose appearance had so roused her,
glanced upward along the path and caught sight of her figure. He lifted
his hat in gay greeting and struck his horse lightly with his whip.
Rebecca bent down and picked up her portfolio.

“You may go home,” she said quietly to the boy. “I shall be there soon;
and you may tell Miss Thorne that Mr. Lennox has come.” She was at the
base of the rock when the stranger drew rein. “How is this?” she asked
with bright uplifted eyes. “We did not think”--

It occurred to Lennox that he had never recognized her peculiar charm
so fully as he did at this moment. Rebecca Noble, though not a
beauty, possessed a subtle grace of look and air which was not easily
resisted,--and just now, as she held out her hand, the clear sweetness
of her face shadowed by her piquantly plain hat of rough straw, he felt
the influence of this element more strongly than ever before.

“There was no reason why I should not come,” he said, “since you did not
forbid me.”

At sunset they returned to the cabin. Lennox led his rather
sorry-looking animal by the bridle, and trusting to its meekness of
aspect, devoted his attention wholly to his companion.

“Thet's Nath Dunbar's critter,” commented “Mis'” Harney, standing at the
door. “They've powerful poor 'commodations fur boardin', but I reckon
Nath must 'a' tuk him in.”

“Then,” said Rebecca, learning that this was the case, “then you have
seen Lodusky.”

But he had not seen Lodusky, it seemed. She had not been at home when
he arrived, and he had only remained in the house long enough to make
necessary arrangements before leaving it to go in search of his friends.

The bare, rough-walled room was very cheery that night. Lennox brought
with him the gossip of the great world, to which he gave an air of
freshness and spice that rendered it very acceptable to the temporary
hermits. Outside, the moon shone with a light as clear as day, though
softer, and the tender night breezes stirred the pine-tops and nestled
among the laurels; inside, by the beautiful barbarous light of the
flaring pine-knots on the hearth, two talkers, at least, found the hours
fly swiftly.

When these two bade each other good-night it was only natural that they
should reach the point toward which they had been veering for twelve
months.

Miss Thorne remained in the room, drawing nearer the fire with an
amiable little shiver, well excused by the mountain coolness, but
Rebecca was beguiled into stepping out into the moonlight The brightness
of the moon and the blackness of the shadows cast by trees and rocks and
undergrowth, seemed somehow to heighten the effect of the intense and
utter stillness reigning around them,--even the occasional distant cry
of some wandering wild creature marked, rather than broke in upon, the
silence. Rebecca's glance about her was half nervous.

“It is very beautiful,” she said, “and it moves one strongly; but I
am not sure that it is not, in some of one's moods, just a little
oppressive.”

It is possible Lennox did not hear her. He was looking down at her with
eager eyes. Suddenly he had caught her hand to his lips and kissed it.

“You know why I am here, Rebecca,” he said. “Surely, all my hoping is
not vain?”

She looked pale and a little startled; but she lifted her face and did
not draw herself away.

“Is it?” he asked again. “Have I come on a hopeless errand?”

“No,” she answered. “You have not.”

His words came freely enough then and with fire. When Rebecca reentered
the cabin her large eyes shone in her small, sweet face, and her lips
wore a charming curve.

Miss Thorne turned in her chair to look at her and was betrayed into a
smile.

“Mr. Lennox has gone, of course,” she said.

“Yes.”

Then, after a brief silence, in which Rebecca pushed the pine-knots with
her foot, the elder lady spoke again.

“Don't you think you may as well tell me about it, Beck, my child?” she
said.

Beck looked down and shook her head with very charming gravity.

“Why should I?” she asked. “When--when you know.”

Lennox rode his mildly disposed but violently gaited steed homeward
in that reposeful state of bliss known only to accepted lovers. He had
plucked his flower at last; he was no longer one of the many; he was
ecstatically content. Uncertainty had no charm for him, and he was by no
means the first discoverer of the subtle fineness her admirers found so
difficult to describe in Miss Noble. Granted that she was not a beauty,
judged rigidly, still he had found in her soft, clear eye, in her color,
her charming voice, even in her little gestures, something which reached
him as an artist and touched him as a man.

“One cannot exactly account for other women's paling before her,” he
said to himself; “but they do--and lose significance.” And then he
laughed tenderly. At this moment, it was true, every other thing on
earth paled and lost significance.

That the family of his host had retired made itself evident to him when
he dismounted at the house. To the silence of the night was added the
silence of slumber. No one was to be seen; a small cow, rendered lean
by active climbing in search of sustenance, breathed peacefully near
the tumble-down fence; the ubiquitous, long-legged, yellow dog, rendered
trustful by long seclusion, aroused himself from his nap to greet the
arrival with a series of heavy raps upon the rickety porch-floor with
a solid but languid tail. Lennox stepped over him in reaching for the
gourd hanging upon the post, and he did not consider it incumbent upon
himself to rise.

In a little hollow at the road-side was the spring from which the
household supplies of water were obtained. Finding none in the wooden
bucket, Lennox took the gourd with the intention of going down to the
hollow to quench his thirst.

“We've powerful good water,” his host had said in the afternoon, “'n'
it's nigh the house, too. I built the house yer a-purpose,--on 'count of
its be-in' nigh.”

He was unconsciously dwelling upon this statement as he walked, and
trying to recall correctly the mountain drawl and twang.

“She,” he said (there was only one “she” for him to-night)--“she will
be sure to catch it and reproduce it in all its shades to the life.”

He was only a few feet from the spring itself and he stopped with a
sharp exclamation of the most uncontrollable amazement,--stopped and
stared straight before him. It was a pretty, dell-like place, darkly
shadowed on one side but bathed in the flooding moonlight on the other,
and it was something he saw in this flood of moonlight which almost
caused him to doubt for the moment the evidence of his senses.

How it was possible for him to believe that there really could stand in
such a spot a girl attired in black velvet of stagy cut and trimmings,
he could not comprehend; but a few feet from him there certainly stood
such a girl, who bent her lithe, round shape over the spring, gazing
into its depths with all the eagerness of an insatiable vanity.

“I can't see nothing” he heard her say impatiently. “I can't see nothin'
nohow.”

Despite the beauty, his first glance could not help showing him she was
a figure so incongruous and inconsistent as to be almost _bizarre_. When
she stood upright revealing fully her tall figure in its shabby finery,
he felt something like resentment. He made a restive movement which she
heard. The bit of broken looking-glass she held in her hand fell into
the water, she uttered a shamefaced angry cry.

“What d'ye want?” she exclaimed. “What are ye a-doin'? I didn't know as
no one was a-lookin'. I”--

Her head was flung backward, her full throat looked like a pillar of
marble against the black edge of her dress, her air was fierce. He would
not have been an artist if he had not been powerfully struck with a
sense of her picturesqueness.

But he did not smile at all as he answered:--

“I board at the house there. I returned home late and was thirsty. I
came here for water to drink.”

Her temper died down as suddenly as it had flamed, and she seemed given
up to a miserable, shamed trepidation.

“Oh,” she said, “don't ye tell 'em--don't--I--I'm Dusk Dunbar.”

Then, as was very natural, he became curious and possibly did smile--a
very little.

“What in the name of all that is fantastic are you doing?”

She made an effort at being defiant and succeeded pretty well.

“I wasn't doin' no harm,” she said. “I was--dressin' up a bit. It aint
nobody's business.”

“That's true,” he answered coolly. “At all events it is not mine--though
it is rather late for a lady to be alone at such a place. However, if
you have no objection, I will get what I came for and go back.”

She said nothing when he stepped down and filled the gourd, but she
regarded him with a sort of irritable watchfulness as he drank.

“Are ye--are ye a-goin' to tell?” she faltered, when he had finished.

“No,” he answered as coolly as before. “Why should I?”

Then he gave her a long look from head to foot The dress was a poor
enough velveteen and had a cast-off air, but it clung to her figure
finely, and its sleeves were picturesque with puffs at the shoulder and
slashings of white,--indeed the moonlight made her all black and white;
her eyes, which were tawny brown by day, were black as velvet now under
the straight lines of her brows, and her face was pure dead fairness
itself.

When, his look ended, his eyes met hers, she drew back with an impatient
movement. .

“Ye look as if--as if ye thought I didn't get it honest,” she exclaimed
petulantly, “but I did.”

That drew his glance toward her dress again, for of course she referred
to that, and he could not help asking her a point-blank question.

“Where _did_ you get it?” he said.

There was a slow flippancy about the manner of her reply which annoyed
him by its variance with her beauty--but the beauty! How the moonlight
and the black and white brought it out as she leaned against the rock,
looking at him from under her lashes!

“Are ye goin' to tell the folks up at the house?” she demanded. “They
don't know nothin' and I don't want 'em to know.”

He shrugged his shoulder negatively.

She laughed with a hint of cool slyness and triumph.

“I got it at Asheville,” she said. “I went with father when they was a
show thar, 'n' the women stayed at the same tavern we was at, 'n' one
of 'em tuk up with me 'n' I done somethin' for her--carried a letter or
two,” breaking into the sly, triumphant laugh again, “'n' she giv' me
the dress fur pay. What d'ye think of it? Is it becomin'?”

The suddenness of the change of manner with which she said these last
words was indescribable. She stood upright, her head up, her hands
fallen at her sides, her eyes cool and straight--her whole presence
confronting him with the power of which she was conscious.

“Is it?” she repeated.

He was a gentleman from instinct and from training, having ordinarily
quite a lofty repugnance for all profanity and brusqueness, and yet some
how,--account for it as you will,--he had the next instant answered her
with positive brutality.

“Yes,” he answered, “Damnably!”

When the words were spoken and he heard their sound fall upon the soft
night air, he was as keenly disgusted as he would have been if he had
heard them uttered by another man. It was not until afterward when he
had had leisure to think the matter over that he comprehended vaguely
the force which had moved him.

But his companion received them without discomfiture. Indeed, it really
occurred to him at the moment that there was a possibility that she
would have been less pleased with an expression more choice.

“I come down here to-night,” she said, “because I never git no chance
to do nothin' up at the house. I'm not a-goin' to let _them_ know. Never
mind why, but ye mustn't tell 'em.”

He felt haughtily anxious to get back to his proper position.

“Why should I?” he said again. “It is no concern of mine.”

Then for the first time he noticed the manner in which she had striven
to dress her hair in the style of her model, Rebecca Noble, and this
irritated him unendurably. He waved his hand toward it with a gesture of
distaste.

“Don't do that again,” he said. “That is not becoming at least “--though
he was angrily conscious that it was.

She bent over the spring with a hint of alarm in her expression.

“Aint it?” she said, and the eager rapidity with which she lifted her
hands and began to alter it almost drew a smile from him despite his
mood.

“I done it like hern,” she began, and stopped suddenly to look up at
him. “You know her,” she added; “they're at Harney's. Father said ye'd
went to see her jest as soon as ye got here.”

“I know her,” was his short reply.

He picked up the drinking-gourd and turned away.

“Good-night,” he said.

“Good-night.”

At the top of the rocky incline he looked back at her.

She was kneeling upon the brink of the spring, her sleeve pushed up to
her shoulder, her hand and arm in the water, dipping for the fragment of
looking-glass.

It was really not wholly inconsistent that he should not directly
describe the interview in his next meeting with his betrothed. Indeed,
Rebecca was rather struck by the coolness with which he treated the
subject when he explained that he had seen the girl and found her beauty
all it had been painted.

“Is it possible,” she asked, “that she did not quite please you?”

“Are you sure,” he returned, “that she quite pleases _you?_”

Rebecca gave a moment to reflection.

“But her beauty”--she began, when it was over.

“Oh!” he interposed, “as a matter of color and curve and proportion she
is perfect; one must admit that, however reluctantly.”

Rebecca laughed.

“Why 'reluctantly?'” she said.

It was his turn to give a moment to reflection.

His face shadowed, and he looked a little disturbed.

“I don't know,” he replied at length; “I give it up.”

He had expected to see a great deal of the girl, but somehow he saw her
even oftener than he had anticipated. During the time he spent in the
house, chance seemed to throw her continually in his path or under his
eye. From his window he saw her carrying water from the spring, driving
the small agile cow to and from the mountain pasturage, or idling in
the shade. Upon the whole it was oftener this last than any other
occupation. With her neglected knitting in her hands she would sit
for hours under a certain low-spreading cedar not far from the door,
barefooted, coarsely clad, beautiful,--every tinge of the sun, every
indifferent leisurely movement, a new suggestion of a new grace.

It would have been impossible to resist the temptation to watch her;
and this Lennox did at first almost unconsciously. Then he did more.
One beautiful still morning she stood under the cedar, her hand
thrown lightly above her head to catch at a bough, and as she remained
motionless, he made a sketch of her. When it was finished he was seized
with the whimsical impulse to go out and show it to her.

She took it with an uncomprehending air, but the moment she saw what it
was a flush of triumph and joy lighted up her face.

“It's me,” she cried in a low, eager voice. “Me! Do I look like that
thar? Do I?”

“You look as that would look if it had color, and was more complete.”

She glanced up at him sharply.

“D'ye mean if it was han'somer?”

He was tempted into adding to her excitement with a compliment.

“Yes,” he said, “very much handsomer than I could ever hope to make it.”

A slow, deep red rose to her face.

“Give it to me!” she demanded.

“If you will stand in the same position until I have drawn
another--certainly,” he returned.

He was fully convinced that when she repeated the attitude there would
be added to it a look of consciousness.

When she settled into position and caught at the bough again, he watched
in some distaste for the growth of the nervously complaisant air, but it
did not appear. She was unconsciousness itself.

It is possible that Rebecca Noble had never been so happy during her
whole life as she was during this one summer. Her enjoyment of every
wild beauty and novelty was immeasurably keen. Just at this time to be
shut out, and to be as it were high above the world, added zest to her
pleasure.

“Ah,” she said once to her lover, “happiness is better here--one can
taste it slowly.”

Fatigue seemed impossible to her. With Lennox as her companion she
performed miracles in the way of walking and climbing, and explored the
mountain fastnesses for miles around. Her step grew firm and elastic,
her color richer, her laugh had a buoyant ring. She had never been so
nearly a beautiful woman as she was sometimes when she came back to the
cabin after a ramble, bright and sun-flushed, her hands full of laurel
and vines.

“Your gown of 'hodden-gray' is wonderfully becoming, Beck,” Lennox said
again and again with a secret exulting pride in her.

Their plans for the future took tone from their blissful, unconventional
life. They could not settle down until they had seen the world. They
would go here and there, and perhaps, if they found it pleasanter so,
not settle down at all. There were certain clay-white, closely built
villages, whose tumble-down houses jostled each other upon divers
precipitous cliffs on the wayside between Florence and Rome, toward
which Lennox's compass seemed always to point. He rather argued that the
fact of their not being dilated upon in the guide-books rendered them
additionally interesting. Rebecca had her fancies too, and together
they managed to talk a good deal of tender, romantic nonsense, which
was purely their own business, and gave the summer days a delicate yet
distinct flavor.

The evening after the sketch was made they spent upon the mountain
side together. When they stopped to rest, Lennox flung himself upon the
ground at Rebecca's feet, and lay looking up at the far away blue of the
sky in which a slow-flying bird circled lazily. Rebecca, with a cluster
of pink and white laurel in her hand, proceeded with a metaphysical and
poetical harangue she had previously begun.

“To my eyes,” she said, “it has a pathetic air of loneliness--pathetic
and yet not exactly sorrowful. It knows nothing but its own pure, brave,
silent life. It is only pathetic to a worldling--worldlings like us. How
fallen we must be to find a life desolate because it has only nature for
a companion!”

She stopped with an idle laugh, waiting for an ironical reply from the
“worldling” at her feet; but he remained silent, still looking upward at
the clear, deep blue.

As she glanced toward him she saw something lying upon the grass between
them, and bent to pick it up. It was the sketch which he had forgotten
and which had slipped from the portfolio.

“You have dropped something,” she said, and seeing what it was, uttered
an exclamation of pleasure.

He came back to earth with a start, and, recognizing the sketch, looked
more than half irritated.

“Oh, it is that, is it?” he said.

“It is perfect!” she exclaimed. “What a pictare it will make!”

“It is not to be a picture,” he answered. “It was not intended to be
anything more than a sketch.”

“But why not?” she asked. “It is too good to lose. You never had such a
model in your life before.”

“No,” he answered grudgingly.

The hand with which Rebecca held the sketch dropped. She turned her
attention to her lover, and a speculative interest grew in her face.

“That girl”--she said slowly, after a mental summing up occupying a few
seconds--“that girl irritates you--irritates you.”

He laughed faintly.

“I believe she does,” he replied; “yes, 'irritates' is the word to use.”

And yet if this were true, his first act upon returning home was a
singular one.

He was rather late, but the girl Lodusky was sitting in the moonlight at
the door. He stopped and spoke to her.

“If I should wish to paint you,” he said rather coldly, “would you do me
the favor of sitting to me?”

She did not answer him at once, but seemed to weigh his words as she
looked out across the moonlight.

“Ye mean, will I let ye put me in a picter?” she said at last.

He nodded.

“Yes,” she answered.

“I reckon he told ye he was a-paintin' Dusk's picter,” “Mis'” Harney
said to her boarders a week later.

“Mr. Lennox?” returned Rebecca; “yes, he told us.”

“I thort so,” nodding benignly. “Waal now, Dusk'll make a powerful
nice picter if she don't git contrairy. The trouble with Dusk is her
a-gittin' contrairy. She's as like old Hance Dunbar as she kin be. I
mean in some ways. Lord knows, 'twouldn't do to say she was like him in
everythin'.”

Naturally, Miss Noble made some inquiries into the nature of old Hance
Dunbar's “contrairiness.” Secretly, she had a desire to account for
Lodusky according to established theory.

“I wonder ye haint heern of him,” said Mis Harney. “He was just
awful--old Hance! He was Nath's daddy, an' Lord! the wickedest feller!
Folks was afeared of him. No one darsn't to go a-nigh him when he'd
git mad--a-rippin' 'n' a-rearin' 'n' a-chargin'.. 'N' he never got no
religion, mind ye; he died jest that a-way. He was allers a hankerin'
arter seein' the world, 'n' he went off an' stayed off a right smart
while,--nine or ten year,--'n' lived in all sorts o' ways in them big
cities. When he come back he was a sight to see, sick 'n' pore 'n'
holler-eyed, but as wicked as ever. Dusk was a little thing 'n' he was
a old man, but he'd laugh 'n' tell her to take care of her face 'n' be a
smart gal. He was drefful sick at last 'n' suffered a heap, 'n' one day
he got up offen his bed 'n' tuk down Nath's gun 'n' shot hisself as cool
as could be. He hadn't no patience, 'n' he said, 'When a G--derned man
had lived through what he had 'n' then wouldn't die, it was time to
kill him.' Seems like it sorter 'counts fur Dusk; she don't git her
cur'usness from her own folks; Nath an' Mandy's mighty clever, both on
'em.”

“Perhaps it does 'count for Dusk,” Rebecca said, after telling the tale
to Lennox. “It must be a fearful thing to have such blood in one's
veins and feel it on fire. Let us,” she continued with a smile, “be as
charitable as possible.”

When the picture was fairly under way, Lennox's visits to the Harneys'
cabin were somewhat less frequent. The mood in which she found he had
gradually begun to regard his work aroused in Rebecca a faint wonder. He
seemed hardly to like it, and yet to be fascinated by it. He was averse
to speaking freely of it, and still he thought of it continually.
Frequently when they were together, he wore an absent, perturbed air.

“You do not look content,” she said to him once.

He passed his hand quickly across his forehead and smiled, plainly with
an effort, but he made no reply.

The picture progressed rather slowly upon the whole. Rebecca had thought
the subject a little fantastic at first, and yet had been attracted by
it. A girl in a peculiar dress of black and white bent over a spring
with an impatient air, trying in vain to catch a glimpse of her beauty
in the reflection of the moonlight.

“It 's our spring, shore,” commented “Mis'” Dunbar. “'N' its Dusk--but
Lord! how fine she's fixed. Ye're as fine as ye want to be in the
picter, Dusk, if ye wa'n't never fine afore. Don't ye wish ye had sich
dressin' as thet thar now?”

The sittings were at the outset peculiarly silent. There was no untimely
motion or change of expression, and yet no trying passiveness. The girl
gave any position a look of unconsciousness quite wonderful. Privately,
Lennox was convinced that she was an actress from habit--that her
ease was the result of life-long practice. Sometimes he found his own
consciousness of her steady gaze almost unbearable. He always turned
to meet her deep eyes fixed upon him with an expression he could not
fathom. Frequently he thought it an expression of dislike--of secret
resentment--of subtle defiance. There came at last a time when he
knew that he turned toward her again and again because he felt that he
must--because he had a feverish wish to see if the look had changed.

Once when he did this he saw that it _had_ changed. She had moved a
little, her eyes were dilated with a fire which startled him beyond
self-control, her color came and went, she breathed fast. The next
instant she sprang from her chair.

“I wont stand it no longer,” she cried panting: “no longer--I wont!”

Her ire was magnificent. She flung her head back, and struck her side
with her clinched hand.

“No longer!” she said; “not a minute!”

Lennox advanced one step and stood, palette in hand, gazing at her.

“What have I done?” he asked. “What?”

“What?” she echoed with contemptuous scorn. “Nothin'! _But d'ye think I
don't know ye?_”

“Know me!” he repeated after her mechanically, finding it impossible to
remove his glance from her.

“What d'ye take me me fur?” she demanded. “A fool? Yes, I was a fool--a
fool to come here, 'n' set 'n' let ye--let ye despise me!” in a final
outburst.

Still he could only echo her again, and say “Despise you!”

Her voice lowered itself into an actual fierceness of tone.

“Ye've done it from first to last,” she said. “Would ye look at her
like ye look at me? Would ye turn half way 'n' look at her, 'n' then
turn back as if--as if--. Aint there”--her eyes ablaze--“aint there no
_life_--to me?”

“Stop!” he began hoarsely.

“I'm beneath her, am I?” she persisted. “Me beneath another woman--Dusk
Dunbar! It's the first time!”

She walked toward the door as if to leave him, but suddenly she stopped.
A passionate tremor shook her; he saw her throat swell. She threw her
arm up against the logs of the wall and dropped her face upon it sobbing
tumultuously.

There was a pause of perhaps three seconds. Then Lennox moved slowly
toward her. Almost unconsciously he laid his hand upon her heaving
shoulder and so stood trembling a little.

When Rebecca paid her next visit to the picture it struck her that it
appeared at a standstill. As she looked at it her lover saw a vague
trouble growing slowly in her eyes.

“What!” he remarked. “It does not please you?”

“I think,” she answered,--“I feel as if it had not pleased you.”

He fell back a few paces and stood scanning it with an impression at
once hard and curious.

“Please me!” he exclaimed in a voice almost strident. “It should. She
has beauty enough.”

On her return home that day Rebecca drew forth from the recesses of her
trunk her neglected writing folio and a store of paper.

Miss Thorne, entering the room, found her kneeling over her trunk, and
spoke to her.

“What are you going to do?” she asked.

Rebeeca smiled faintly.

“What I ought to have begun before,” she said. “I am behindhand with my
work.”

She laid the folio and her inkstand upon the table, and made certain
methodical arrangements for her labor. She worked diligently all day,
and looked slightly pale and wearied when she rose from her seat in
the evening. Until eleven o'clock she sat at the open door, sometimes
talking quietly, sometimes silent and listening to the wind among the
pines. She did, not mention her lover's name, and he did not come.
She spent many a day and night in the same manner after this. For the
present the long, idle rambles and unconventional moon-lit talks were
over. It was tacitly understood between herself and her aunt that
Lennox's labor occupied him.

“It seems a strange time to begin a picture--during a summer holiday,”
 said Miss Thorne a little sharply upon one occasion.

Rebecca laughed with an air of cheer.

“No time is a strange time to an artist,” she answered. “Art is a
mistress who gives no holidays.”

She was continually her bright, erect, alert self. The woman who loved
her dearly and had known her from her earliest childhood, found her
sagacity and knowledge set at naught as it were. She had been accustomed
to see her niece admired far beyond the usual lot of women; she had
gradually learned to feel it only natural that she should inspire
quite a strong sentiment even in casual acquaintances. She had felt the
delicate power of her fascination herself, but never at her best and
brightest had she found her more charming or quicker of wit and fancy
than she was now.

Even Lennox, coming every few days with a worn-out look and touched with
a haggard shadow, made no outward change in her.

“She does not look,” said the elder lady to herself, “like a neglected
woman.” And then the sound of the phrase struck her with a sharp
incredulous pain. “A neglected woman!” she repeated,--“Beck!”

She did not understand, and was not weak enough to ask questions.

Lennox came and went, and Rebecca gained upon her work until she
could no longer say she was behindhand. The readers of her letters and
sketches found them fresh and sparkling, “as if,” wrote a friend, “you
were braced both mentally and physically by the mountain air.”

But once in the middle of the night Miss Thorne awakened with a
mysterious shock to find the place at her side empty, and her niece
sitting at the open window in a quiet which suggested that she might not
have moved for an hour.

She obeyed her strong first impulse, and rose and went to her.

She laid her hand on her shoulder, and shook her gently.

“Beck!” she demanded, “what are you doing?”

When the girl turned slowly round, she started sit the sight of her
cold, miserable pallor.

“I am doing nothing--nothing,” she answered. “Why did you get up? It's a
fine night, isn't it?”

Despite her discretion, Miss Thorne broke down into a blunder.

“You--you never look like this in the daytime!” she exclaimed.

“No,” was the reply given with cool deliberateness. “No; I would rather
_die_.”

For the moment she was fairly incomprehensible. There was in the set of
her eye and the expression of her fair, clear face, the least hint of
dogged obstinacy.

“Beck “--she began.

“You ought not to have got up,” said Beck. “It is enough to look 'like
this' at night when I am by myself. Go back to bed, if you please.”

Miss Thorne went back to bed meekly. She was at once alarmed and
subdued. She felt as if she had had a puzzling interview with a
stranger.

In these days Lennox regarded his model with morbid interest. A subtle
change was perceptible in her. Her rich color deepened, she held herself
more erect, her eye had a larger pride and light. She was a finer
creature than ever, and yet--she came at his call. He never ceased to
wonder at it. Sometimes the knowledge of his power stirred within him a
vast impatience; sometimes he was hardened by it; but somehow it never
touched him, though he was thrown into tumult--bound against his will.
He could not say that he understood her. Her very passiveness baffled
him and caused him to ask himself what it meant. She spoke little,
and her emotional phases seemed reluctant, but her motionless face and
slowly raised eye always held a meaning of their own.

On an occasion when he mentioned his approaching departure, she started
as if she had received a blow, and he turned to see her redden and pale
alternately, her face full of alarm.

“What is the matter?” he asked brusquely.

“I--hadn't bin thinkin' on it,” she stammered. “I'd kinder forgot.”

He turned to his easel again and painted rapidly for a few minutes. Then
he felt a light touch on his arm. She had left her seat noiselessly and
stood beside him. She gave him a passionate, protesting look. A fire of
excitement seemed to have sprung up within her and given her a defiant
daring.

“D'ye think I'll stay here--when ye're gone--like I did before?” she
said.

She had revealed herself in many curious lights to him, but no previous
revelation had been so wonderful as was the swift change of mood and
bearing which took place in her at this instant. In a moment she had
melted into soft tears, her lips were tremulous, her voice dropped into
a shaken whisper.

“I've allers wanted to go away,” she said. “I--I've allers said I
would. I want to go to a city somewhar--I don't keer whar. I might git
work--I've heerd of folks as did. P'r'aps some un ud hire me!”

He stared at her like a man fascinated.

“_You_ go to the city alone!” he said under his breath. “_You_ try to
get work!”

“Yes,” she answered. “Don't ye know no one”--

He stopped her.

“No,” he said, “I don't. It would be a dangerous business unless you
had friends. As for me, I shall not be in America long. As soon as I am
married I go with my wife to Europe.”

He heard a sharp click in her throat. Her tears were dried, and she was
looking straight at him.

“Are ye a-goin' to be married?” she asked.

“Yes.”

“To--_her?_” with a gesture in the direction of the Harneys' cabin.

“Yes.”

“Oh!” and she walked out of the room.

He did not see her for three days, and the picture stood still. He went
to the Harneys' and found Rebecca packing her trunk.

“We are going back to New York,” she said.

“Why?” he asked.

“Because our holiday is over.”

Miss Thorne regarded him with chill severity.

“When may we expect to see you?” she inquired.

He really felt half stupefied,--as if for the time being his will was
paralyzed.

“I don't know,” he answered.

He tried to think that he was treated badly and coldly. He told himself
that he had done nothing to deserve this style of thing, that he had
simply been busy and absorbed in his work, and that if he had at times
appeared preoccupied it was not to be wondered at. But when he looked
at Rebecca he did not put these thoughts into words; he did not even say
that of course he should follow them soon, since there was nothing to
detain him but a sketch or two he had meant to make.

By night they were gone and he was left restless and miserable. He was
so restless that he could not sleep but wandered down toward the spring.
He stopped at the exact point at which he had stopped on the night of
his arrival--at the top of the zigzag little path leading down the rocky
incline. He stopped because he heard a sound of passionate
sobbing. He descended slowly. He knew the sound--angry, fierce,
uncontrollable--because he had heard it before. It checked itself the
instant he reached the ground. Lodusky leaning against a projecting rock
kept her eyes fixed upon the water.

“Why did you come here?” he demanded, a little excitedly. “What are you
crying for? What has hurt you?”

“Nothing” in a voice low and unsteady.

He drew a little nearer to her and for the first time was touched.
She would not look at him, she was softened and altered, in her whole
appearance, by a new pallor.

“Have “--he began, “have I?”

“You!” she cried, turning on him with a bitter, almost wild gesture.
“_You_ wouldn't keer if I was struck _dead_ afore ye!”

“Look here,” he said to her, with an agitation he could not master. “Let
me tell you something about myself. If you think I am a passably good
fellow you are mistaken. I am a bad fellow, a poor fellow, an ignoble
fellow. You don't understand?” as she gazed at him in bewilderment. “No,
of course, you don't. God knows I didn't myself until within the last
two weeks. It's folly to say such things to you; perhaps I say them half
to satisfy myself. But I mean to show you that I am not to be trusted.
I think perhaps I am too poor a fellow to love any woman honestly and
altogether. I followed one woman here, and then after all let another
make me waver”--

“Another!” she faltered.

He fixed his eyes on her almost coldly.

“You,” he said.

He seemed to cast the word at her and wonder what she would make of it
He waited a second or so before he went on.

“_You_, and yet you are not the woman I love either. Good God! What a
villain I must be. I am an insult to every woman that breathes. It
is not even you--though I can't break from you, and you have made me
despise myself. There! do you know now--do you see now that I am not
worth “--

The next instant he started backward. Before he had time for a thought
she had uttered a low cry, and flung herself down at his feet.

“I don't keer,” she panted; “I wont keer fur nothin',--whether ye're
good or bad,--only don't leave me here when ye go away.”

*****

A week later Lennox arose one morning and set about the task of getting
his belongings together. He had been up late and had slept heavily and
long. He felt exhausted and looked so.

The day before, his model had given him his last sitting. The picture
stood finished upon the easel. It was a thorough and artistic piece of
work, and yet the sight of it was at times unbearable to him. There were
times again, however, when it fascinated him anew when he went and stood
opposite to it, regarding it with an intense gaze. He scarcely knew
how the last week had passed. It seemed to have been spent in alternate
feverish struggles and reckless abandonment to impulse. He had let
himself drift here and there, he had at last gone so far as to tell
himself that the time had arrived when baseness was possible to him.

“I don't promise you an easy life,” he had said to Dusk the night
before. “I tell you I am a bad fellow, and I have lost something through
you that I cared for. You may wish yourself back again.”

“If you leave me,” she said, “I'll kill myself!” and she struck her
hands together.

For the moment he was filled, as he often was, with a sense of
passionate admiration. It was true he saw her as no other creature had
ever seen her before, that so far as such a thing was possible with her,
she loved him--loved him with a fierce, unreserved, yet narrow passion.

He had little actual packing to do--merely the collecting of a few
masculine odds and ends, and then his artistic accompaniments.
Nothing was of consequence but these; the rest were tossed together
indifferently, but the picture was to be left until the last moment,
that its paint might be dry beyond a doubt.

Having completed his preparations he went out. He had the day before
him, and scarcely knew what to do with it, but it must be killed in one
way or another. He wandered up the mountain and at last lay down with
his cigar among the laurels. He was full of a strange excitement which
now thrilled, now annoyed him.

He came back in the middle of the afternoon and laughed a rather
half-hearted laugh at the excellent Mandy's comment upon his jaded
appearance.

“Ye look kinder tuckered out,” she said. “Ye'd oughtn't ter walked so
fur when ye was a-gwine off to-night. Ye'd orter rested.”

She stopped the churn-dasher and regarded him with a good-natured air of
interest.

“Hev ye seed Dusk to say good-by to her?” she added. “She's went over
the mountain ter help Mirandy Stillins with her soap. She wont be back
fur a day or two.”

He went into his room and shut the door. A fierce repulsion sickened
him. He had heretofore held himself with a certain degree of inward
loftiness; he had so condemned the follies and sins of other men, and
here he found himself involved in a low and common villainy, in the
deceits which belonged to his crime, and which preyed upon simplicity
and ignorant trust.

He went and stood before his easel, hot with a blush of self-scorn.

“Has it come to this?” he muttered through his clinched teeth--“to
_this!_”

He made an excited forward movement; his foot touched the supports of
the easel, jarring it roughly; the picture fell upon the floor.

“What?” he cried out. “Beck! You! Great God!”

For before him, revealed by the picture's fall, the easel held one
of the fairest memories he had of the woman he had proved himself too
fickle and slight to value rightly.

It was merely a sketch made rapidly one day soon after his arrival and
never wholly completed, but it had been touched with fire and feeling,
and the face looked out from the canvas with eyes whose soft happiness
stung him to the quick with the memories they brought. He had meant to
finish it, and had left it upon the easel that he might turn to it
at any moment, and it had remained there, covered by a stronger
rival--forgotten.

He sat down in a chair and his brow fell upon his hands. He felt as if
he had been clutched and dragged backward by a powerful arm.

When at last he rose, he strode to the picture lying upon the floor,
ground it under his heel, and spurned it from him with an imprecation.

He was, at a certain hour, to reach a particular bend in the road some
miles distant. He was to walk to this place and if he found no one
there, to wait.

When at sunset that evening he reached it, he was half an hour before
the time specified, but he was not the first at the tryst. He was within
twenty yards of the spot when a figure rose from the roots of a tree and
stood waiting for him--the girl Dusk with a little bundle in her hand.

She was not flushed or tremulous with any hint of mental excitement; she
awaited him with a fine repose, even the glow of the dying sun having no
power to add to her color, but as he drew near he saw her look gradually
change. She did not so much as stir, but the change grew slowly, slowly
upon her face, and developed there into definite shape--the shape of
secret, repressed dread.

“What is it,” she asked when he at last confronted her, “that ails ye?”

She uttered the words in a half whisper, as if she had not the power to
speak louder, and he saw the hand hanging at her side close itself.

“What is it--that ails ye?”

He waited a few seconds before he answered her.

“Look at me,” he said at last, “and see.”

She did look at him. For the space of ten seconds their eyes were fixed
upon each other in a long, bitter look. Then her little bundle dropped
on the ground.

“Ye've went back on me,” she said under her breath again. “Ye've went
back on me!”

He had thought she might make some passionate outcry, but she did not
yet. A white wrath was in her face and her chest heaved, but she spoke
slowly and low, her hands fallen down by her side.

“Ye've went back on me,” she said. “An' _I knew ye would_.”

He felt that the odor of his utter falseness tainted the pure air about
him; he had been false all round,--to himself, to his love, to his
ideals,--even in a baser way here.

“Yes,” he answered her with a bitterness she did not understand, “I've
gone back on you.” Then, as if to himself, “I could not even reach
perfection in villainy.”

Then her rage and misery broke forth.

“Yer a coward!” she said, with gasps between her words. “Yer afraid! I'd
sooner--I'd sooner ye'd killed me--_dead!_”

Her voice shrilled itself into a smothered shriek, she cast herself face
downward upon the earth and lay there clutching amid her sobs at the
grass.

He looked down at her in a cold, stunned fashion.

“Do you think,” he said hoarsely, “that you can loathe me as I loathe
myself? Do you think you can call me one shameful name I don't know I
deserve? If you can, for God's sake let me have it.”

She struck her fist against the earth.

“Thar wasn't a man I ever saw,” she said, “that didn't foller after me,
'n' do fur me, 'n' wait fur a word from me. They'd hev let me set my
foot on 'em if I'd said it. Thar wasn't nothin' I mightn't hev done--not
nothin'. An' now--an' now “--and, she tore the grass from its earth and
flung it from her.

“Go on,” he said. “Go on and say your worst.”

Her worst was bad enough, but he almost exulted under the blows she
dealt him. He felt the horrible sting a vague comfort. He had fallen
low enough surely when it was a comfort to be told that he was a liar, a
poltroon, and a scoundrel.

The sun had been down an hour when it was over and she had risen and
taken up her bundle.

“Why don't ye ask me to forgive ye?” she said with a scathing sneer.
“Why don't ye ask me to forgive ye--an' say ye didn't mean to do it?”

He fell back a pace and was silent. With what grace would the words have
fallen from his lips? And yet he knew that he had not _meant_ to do it.

She turned away and at a distance of a few feet stopped. She gave him a
last look--a fierce one in its contempt and anger, and her affluence of
beauty had never been so stubborn a fact before.

“Ye think ye've left me behind,” she said. “An' so ye hev--but it aint
fur allers. The time'll come when mebbe ye'll see me ag'in.”

He returned to New York, but he had been there a week before he went to
Rebecca. Finally, however, he awoke one morning feeling that the time
had come for the last scene of his miserable drama. He presented himself
at the house and sent up his name, and in three minutes Rebecca came to
him.

It struck him with a new thrill of wretchedness to see that she wore
by chance the very dress she had worn the day he had made the sketch--a
pale, pure-looking gray, with a scarf of white lace loosely fastened at
her throat. Next, he saw that there was a painful change in her, that
she looked frail and worn, as if she had been ill. His first words he
scarcely heard and never remembered. He had not come to make a defense,
but a naked, bitter confession. As he made it low and monotonously, in
brief, harsh words, holding no sparing for himself, Rebecca stood with
her hand upon the mantle looking at him with simple directness. There
was no rebuke in her look, but there was weariness. It occurred to him
once or twice and with a terribly humiliating pang, that she was tired
of him,--tired of it all.

“I have lost you,” he ended. “And I have lost myself. I have seen myself
as I am,--a poorer figure, a grosser one than I ever dreamed of being,
even in the eyes of my worst enemy. Henceforth, this figure will be
my companion. It is as if I looked at myself in a bad glass; but now,
though the reflection is a pitiable one, the glass is true.”

“You think,” she said, after a short silence, “of going away?”

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“To Europe.”

“Oh,” she ejaculated, with a soft, desperate sound of pain.

His eyes had been downcast and he raised them.

“Yes,” he said, mournfully. “We were to have gone together.”

“Yes,” she answered, “together.”

Her eyes were wet.

“I was very happy,” she said, “for a little while.”

She held out her hand.

“But,” she added, as if finishing a sentence, “you have been truer to me
than you think.”

“No--no,” he groaned.

“Yes, truer to me than you think--and truer to yourself. It was I you
loved--I! There have been times when I thought I must give that up,
but now I know I need not. It was I. Sometime, perhaps,--sometime,--not
now”--

Her voice broke, she did not finish, the end was a sob. Their eyes
rested upon each other a few seconds, and then he released her hand and
went away.

He was absent for two years, and during that time his friends heard
much good of him. He lived the life of a recluse and a hard worker. He
learned to know his own strength, and taught the world to recognize it
also.

At the end of the second year, being in Paris, he went one night to the
_Nouvelle Opéra_. Toward the close of the second act he became conscious
of a little excited stir among those surrounding him. Every glass seemed
directed toward a new arrival who stood erect and cool in one of the
stage-boxes. She might have been Cleopatra. Her costume was of a creamy
satin, she was covered with jewels, and she stood up confronting the
house, as it regarded her, with _sang froid_.

Lennox rose hurriedly and left the place. He was glad to breathe the
bitterly cold but pure night air. She had made no idle prophecy. He had
seen her again!

There hung upon the wall of his private room a picture whose completion
had been the first work after his landing. He went in to it and looked
at it with something like adoration.

“'Sometime'” he said, “perhaps now,” and the next week he was on his way
home.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lodusky, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LODUSKY ***

***** This file should be named 23327-0.txt or 23327-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/2/23327/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
