A Child's Garden of Verses~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Child's Garden of Verses, by Robert Louis
Stevenson, Illustrated by Myrtle Sheldon


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Child's Garden of Verses


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson



Release Date: November 6, 2006  [eBook #19722]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHILD'S GARDEN OF VERSES***


E-text prepared by Joseph R. Hauser, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 19722-h.htm or 19722-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/7/2/19722/19722-h/19722-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/7/2/19722/19722-h.zip)





A CHILD'S GARDEN OF VERSES

by

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSoN

Illustrated by Myrtle Sheldon







M. A. Donohue & Co.
Chicago
Copyright 1916
by
M. A. Donohue and Company





BY WAY of INTRODUCTION

[Illustration]


Nothing has ever been written that appeals to a child's nature more
than "A CHILD'S GARDEN OF VERSES." It is written in a simple verse
that a child can readily understand. It was one of the earlier efforts
of the author, Robert Louis Stevenson, a Scotchman by birth, who,
owing to ill-health, became a world traveler. During his travels he
visited the United States, spending a year among our famous resorts.
Later he visited Australia and the South Sea Islands, which climate
agreed with him to such an extent that he finally settled down and
made his home on the island of Samoa. He continued his travels from
that point, often visiting the Hawaiian Islands, Australia and New
Zealand. He formed a strong friendship for the natives of Samoa, and
did a great deal to improve their conditions. He died on the island,
and at his own request was buried on the top of one of its beautiful
mountains, with the following lines upon his tomb:

    _Here he lies, where he longed to be;
    Home is the Sailor, home from the sea,
    And the hunter home from the hill._

[Illustration]





CONTENTS

[Illustration]


   BED IN SUMMER

   YOUNG NIGHT THOUGHT

   PIRATE STORY

   FAREWELL TO THE FARM

   THE LAND OF COUNTERPANE

   FAIRY BREAD

   ESCAPE AT BEDTIME

   A GOOD PLAY

   MARCHING SONG

   WHERE GO THE BOATS

   THE HAYLOFT

   AUNTIE'S SKIRTS

   THE MOON

   THE COW

   FOREIGN LANDS

   SYSTEM

   AT THE SEASIDE

   HAPPY THOUGHT

   THE LAND OF NOD

   WINDY NIGHTS

   TIME TO RISE

   RAIN

   FOREIGN CHILDREN

   LOOKING FORWARD

   MY SHADOW

   THE SUN'S TRAVELS

   LOOKING-GLASS RIVER

   THE LAMPLIGHTER

   SINGING

   TRAVEL

   MY BED IS A BOAT

   KEEPSAKE MILL

   THE UNSEEN PLAYMATE

   MY SHIP AND I

   THE WIND

   A GOOD BOY

   GOOD AND BAD CHILDREN

   PICTURE-BOOKS IN WINTER

   THE SWING

   A THOUGHT

   ARMIES IN THE FIRE

   MY KINGDOM

   SHADOW MARCH

   WINTER-TIME

   THE LITTLE LAND

   IN PORT

   NIGHT AND DAY

   NEST EGGS

   THE FLOWERS

   FROM A RAILWAY CARRIAGE

   MY TREASURES

   BLOCK CITY

   THE GARDENER




A CHILD'S GARDEN of VERSES

[Illustration]

BED IN SUMMER


    In winter I get up at night,
    And dress by yellow candle light.
    In summer quite the other way,
    I have to go to bed by day.

    I have to go to bed and see
    The birds still hopping on the tree,
    Or hear the grown-up people's feet,
    Still going past me in the street.

[Illustration]

    And does it not seem hard to you,
    When all the sky is clear and blue,
    And I should like so much to play,
    To have to go to bed by day?




YOUNG NIGHT THOUGHT


    All night long and every night,
    When my mamma puts out the light
    I see the people marching by,
    As plain as day, before my eye.

    Armies and emperors and kings,
    All carrying different kinds of things,
    And marching in so grand a way,
    You never saw the like by day.

    So fine a show was never seen
    At the great circus on the green;
    For every kind beast and man
    Is marching in that caravan.

    At first they move a little slow,
    But still the faster on they go,
    And still beside them close I keep
    Until we reach the Town of Sleep.

[Illustration]




PIRATE STORY


    Three of us afloat in the meadow by the swing.
    Three of us aboard in the basket on the lea.
    Winds are in the air, they are blowing in the spring,
    And waves are on the meadow like the waves there are at sea.

    Where shall we adventure, to-day that we're afloat,
      Wary of the weather and steering by a star?
    Shall it be to Africa, a-steering of the boat,
      To Providence, or Babylon, or off to Malabar?

    Hi! but here's a squadron a-rowing on the sea--
      Cattle on the meadow a-charging with a roar!
    Quick, and we'll escape them, they're as mad as they can be,
    The wicket is the harbor and the garden is the shore.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




FAREWELL TO THE FARM


    The coach is at the door at last;
    The eager children, mounting fast
    And kissing hands, in chorus sing:
    Good-bye, good-bye, to everything!

    To house and garden, field and lawn,
    The meadow-gates we swung upon,
    To pump and stable, tree and swing,
    Good-bye, good-bye, to everything!

    And fare you well for evermore,
    O ladder at the hayloft door,
    O hayloft where the cobwebs cling,
    Good-bye, good-bye, to everything!

    Crack goes the whip, and off we go;
    The trees and houses smaller grow;
    Last, round the woody turn we swing:
    Good-bye, good-bye, to everything!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE LAND OF COUNTERPANE


    When I was sick and lay a-bed,
    I had two pillows at my head,
    And all my toys beside me lay
    To keep me happy all the day.

    And sometimes for an hour or so
    I watched my leaden soldiers go,
    With different uniforms and drills,
    Among the bed-clothes, through the hills.

    And sometimes sent my ships in fleets
    All up and down among the sheets;
    Or brought my trees and houses out,
    And planted cities all about.

    I was the giant great and still
    That sits upon the pillow-hill,
    And sees before him, dale and plain
    The pleasant Land of Counterpane.

[Illustration]

    Come up here, O dusty feet!
      Here is fairy bread to eat

    Here in my retiring room,
      Children, you may dine

    On the golden smell of broom
      And the shade of pine

    And when you have eaten well,
      Fairy stories hear and tell.

[Illustration]




ESCAPE AT BEDTIME


    The lights from the parlor and kitchen shone out
      Through the blinds and the windows and bars;
    And high over head and all moving about,
      There were thousands of millions of stars.
    There ne'er were such thousands of leaves on a tree,
      Nor of people in church or the Park,
    As the crowds of the stars that looked down upon me,
      And that glittered and winked in the dark.

    The Dog, and the Plough, and the Hunter and all,
      And the star of the sailor, and Mars,
    These shone in the sky, and the pail by the wall
      Would be half full of water and stars.
    They saw me at last, and they chased me with cries,
      And they soon had me packed into bed;
    But the glory kept shining and bright in my eyes,
    And the stars going round in my head.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




A GOOD PLAY


    We built a ship upon the stairs
    All made of the back-bedroom chairs,
    And filled it full of sofa pillows
    To go a-sailing on the billows.

    We took a saw and several nails,
    And water in the nursery pails;
    And Tom said, "Let us also take
    An apple and a slice of cake;"--
    Which was enough for Tom and me
    To go a-sailing on, till tea.

    We sailed along for days and days,
    And had the very best of plays;
    But Tom fell out and hurt his knee,
    So there was no one left but me.

[Illustration]




MARCHING SONG


    Bring the comb and play upon it!
      Marching, here we come!
    Willie cocks his highland bonnet,
      Johnnie beats the drum.

    Mary Jane commands the party,
      Peter leads the rear;
    Feet in time, alert and hearty,
      Each a Grenadier!

    All in the most martial manner
      Marching double-quick;
    While the napkin like a banner
      Waves upon the stick!

    Here's enough of fame and pillage,
      Great commander Jane!
    Now that we've been round the village,
      Let's go home again.

[Illustration: "_Boats of mine a-boating_"]




WHERE GO THE BOATS?


    Dark brown is the river,
        Golden is the sand.
    It flows along for ever,
        With trees on either hand.

    Green leaves a-floating,
        Castles of the foam,
    Boats of mine a-boating--
        Where will all come home?

    On goes the river
        And out past the mill,
    Away down the valley,
        Away down the hill.

    Away down the river,
        A hundred miles or more,
    Other little children
        Shall bring my boats ashore.




THE HAYLOFT


    Through all the pleasant meadow-side
      The grass grew shoulder-high,
    Till the shining scythes went far and wide
      And cut it down to dry.

    These green and sweetly smelling crops
      They led in wagons home;
    And they piled them here in mountain-tops
      For mountaineers to roam.

    Here is Mount Clear, Mount Rusty-Nail,
      Mount Eagle and Mount High;--
    The mice that in these mountains dwell,
      No happier are than I!

    O what a joy to clamber there,
      O what a place for play,
    With the sweet, the dim, the dusty air,
      The happy hills of hay!

[Illustration]




AUNTIE'S SKIRTS


    Whenever Auntie moves around
      Her dresses make a curious sound.
    They trail behind her up the floor,
      And trundle after through the door.

[Illustration]




THE MOON


    The moon has a face like the clock in the hall;
    She shines on thieves on the garden wall,
    On streets and fields and harbor quays,
    And birdies asleep in the forks of the trees.

    The squalling cat and the squeaking mouse,
    The howling dog by the door of the house,
    The bat that lies in bed at noon,
    All love to be out by the light of the moon.

    But all of the things that belong to the day
    Cuddle to sleep to be out of her way;
    And flowers and children close their eyes
    Till up in the morning the sun shall rise.

[Illustration]




THE COW


    The friendly cow all red and white,
        I love with all my heart:
    She gives me cream with all her might,
        To eat with apple-tart.

    She wanders lowing here and there,
        And yet she cannot stray,
    All in the pleasant open air,
        The pleasant light of day.

    And blown by all the winds that pass
        And wet with all the showers,
    She walks among the meadow grass
        And eats the meadow flowers.

[Illustration]




FOREIGN LANDS


    Up into the cherry tree
    Who should climb but little me?
    I held the trunk with both my hands
    And looked abroad on foreign lands.

    I saw the next door garden lie,
    Adorned with flowers, before my eye,
    And many pleasant places more
    That I had never seen before.

    I saw the dimpling river pass
    And be the sky's blue looking-glass;
    The dusty roads go up and down
    With people tramping into town.

    If I could find a higher tree
    Farther and farther I should see,
    To where the grown-up river slips
    Into the sea among the ships.

    To where the roads on either hand
    Lead onward into fairy land,
    Where all the children dine at five,
    And all the playthings come alive.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




SYSTEM


    Every night my prayers I say,
    And get my dinner every day;
    And every day that I've been good
    I get an orange after food.

    The child that is not clean and neat,
    With lots of toys and things to eat,
    He is a naughty child, I'm sure--
    Or else his dear papa is poor.

[Illustration]




AT THE SEASIDE


    When I was down beside the sea,
    A wooden spade they gave to me
      To dig the sandy shore.
    My holes were hollow like a cup,
    In every hole the sea came up,
      Till it could hold no more.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




HAPPY THOUGHT


    The world is so full of a number of things,
    I'm sure we should all be as happy as kings

[Illustration]




THE LAND OF NOD


    From breakfast on through all the day
    At home among my friends I stay,
    But every night I go abroad
    Afar into the Land of Nod.

    All by myself I have to go,
    With none to tell me what to do--
    All alone beside the streams
    And up the mountain-sides of dreams.

    The strangest things are there for me,
    Both things to eat and things to see,
    And many frightening sights abroad
    Till morning in the Land of Nod.

    Try as I like to find the way,
    I never can get back by day,
    Nor can remember plain and clear
    The curious music that I hear.

[Illustration]




WINDY NIGHTS


    Whenever the moon and stars are set,
      Whenever the wind is high,
    All night long in the dark and wet,
      A man goes riding by.
    Late in the night when the fires are out,

[Illustration]

    Why does he gallop and gallop about?
    Whenever the trees are crying aloud,
      And ships are tossed at sea,
    By, on the highway, low and loud,
      By at the gallop goes he.
    By at the gallop he goes, and then
    By he comes back at the gallop again.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




TIME TO RISE


    A birdie with a yellow bill
      Hopped up on the window sill,
    Cocked his shining eye and said:
    'Ain't you 'shamed, you sleepy-head?'

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




RAIN


    The rain is raining all around.
      It falls on field and tree,
    It rains on the umbrellas here,
      And on the ships at sea.

[Illustration]




FOREIGN CHILDREN


    Little Indian, Sioux or Crow,
    Little frosty Eskimo,
    Little Turk or Japanee,
    O! don't you wish that you were me?

    You have seen the scarlet trees
    And the lions over seas;
    You have eaten ostrich eggs,
    And turned the turtles off their legs.

    Such a life is very fine,
    But it's not so nice as mine:
    You must often, as you trod,
    Have wearied _not_ to be abroad.

    You have curious things to eat,
    I am fed on proper meat;
    You must dwell beyond the foam,
    But I am safe and live at home.

[Illustration]




LOOKING FORWARD


      When I am grown to man's estate
    I shall be very proud and great,
      And tell the other girls and boys
    Not to meddle with my toys.




MY SHADOW


    I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,
    And what can be the use of him is more than I can see.
    He is very, very like me, from the heels up to the head;
    And I see him jump before me, when I jump into my bed.

    The funniest thing about him is the way he likes to grow--
    Not at all like proper children, which is always very slow;
    For he sometimes shoots up taller, like an india-rubber ball,
    And he sometimes gets so little that there's none of him at all.

[Illustration: "_I have a little shadow._"]

    He hasn't got a notion of how children ought to play,
    And can only make a fool of me in every sort of way.
    He stays so close beside me, he's a coward you can see;
    I'd think shame to stick to nursie as that shadow sticks to me!

    One morning, very early, before the sun was up,
    I 'rose and found the shining dew on every buttercup;
    But my lazy little shadow, like an arrant sleepy head,
    Had stayed at home behind me and was fast asleep in bed.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE SUN'S TRAVELS


    The sun is not a-bed when I
    At night upon my pillow lie;
    Still round the earth his way he takes,
    And morning after morning makes.

    While here at home in shining day,
    We round the sunny garden play,
    Each little Indian sleepy-head
    Is being kissed and put to bed.

    And when at eve I rise from tea,
    Day dawns beyond the Atlantic Sea;
    And all the children in the West
    Are getting up and being dressed.

[Illustration]




LOOKING-GLASS RIVER


    Smooth it slides upon its travel,
    Here a wimple, there a gleam--
        O the clean gravel!
        O the smooth stream!

    Sailing blossoms, silver fishes,
      Paven pools as clear as air--
        How a child wishes
        To live down there!

[Illustration]

    We can see our colored faces
      Floating on the shaken pool
        Down in cool places,
        Dim and very cool;

    Till a wind or water wrinkle,
      Dipping marten, plumping trout,
        Spreads in a twinkle
        And blots all out.

    See the rings pursue each other;
      All below grows black as night,
        Just as if mother
        Had blown out the light!

    Patience, children, just a minute--
      See the spreading circles die;
        The stream and all in it
        Will clear by-and-by.

[Illustration]




THE LAMPLIGHTER


    My tea is nearly ready and the sun has left the sky;
    It's time to take the window to see Leerie going by;
    For every night at teatime and before you take your seat,
    With lantern and with ladder he comes posting up the street.

    Now Tom would be a driver and Maria go to sea,
    And my papa's a banker and as rich as he can be;
    But I, when I am stronger and can choose what I'm to do,
    O Leerie, I'll go round at night and light the lamps with you!

    For we are very lucky, with a lamp before the door,
    And Leerie stops to light it as he lights so many more;
    And O, before you hurry by with ladder and with light,
    O Leerie, see a little child and nod to him to-night!

[Illustration]




SINGING


    Of speckled eggs the birdie sings
      And nests among the trees;
    The sailor sings of ropes and things
      In ships upon the seas.

    The children sing in far Japan,
      The children sing in Spain;
    The organ with the organ man
      Is singing in the rain.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




TRAVEL


    I should like to rise and go
    Where the golden apples grow;--
    Where below another sky
    Parrot Islands anchored lie,
    And, watched by cockatoos and goats,
    Lonely Crusoes building boats;--
    Where in sunshine reaching out
    Eastern cities, miles about,
    Are with mosque and minaret
    Among sandy gardens set,
    And the rich goods from near and far
    Hang for sale in the bazaar;--
    Where the Great Wall round China goes,
    And on one side the desert blows,
    And with bell and voice and drum,
    Cities on the other hum;--
    Where are forests, hot as fire,
    Wide as England, tall as a spire,
    Full of apes and cocoa-nuts
    And the negro hunters' huts;--
    Where the knotty crocodile
    Lies and blinks in the Nile,
    And the red flamingo flies
    Hunting fish before his eyes;--
    Where in jungles, near and far,
    Man-devouring tigers are,
    Lying close and giving ear
    Lest the hunt be drawing near,
    Or a comer-by be seen
    Swinging in a palanquin;--
    Where among the desert sands
    Some deserted city stands,
    All its children, sweep and prince,
    Grown to manhood ages since,
    Not a foot in street or house,
    Not a stir of child or mouse,
    And when kindly falls the night,
    In all the town no spark of light.
    There I'll come when I'm a man
    With a camel caravan;
    Light a fire in the gloom
    Of some dusty dining room;
    See the pictures on the walls,
    Heroes, fights and festivals
    And in a corner find the toys
    Of the old Egyptian boys.

[Illustration]




MY BED IS A BOAT

[Illustration: _My bed is like a little boat_]


    My bed is like a little boat;
      Nurse helps me in when I embark;
    She girds me in my sailor's coat
      And starts me in the dark.

    At night, I go on board and say
      Good night to all my friends on shore;
    I shut my eyes and sail away
      And see and hear no more.

    And sometimes things to bed I take,
      As prudent sailors have to do;
    Perhaps a slice of wedding-cake,
      Perhaps a toy or two.

    All night across the dark we steer:
      But when the day returns at last
    Safe in my room, beside the pier,
      I find my vessel fast.

[Illustration]




KEEPSAKE MILL


    Over the borders, a sin without pardon,
      Breaking the branches and crawling below,
    Out through the breach in the wall of the garden,
      Down by the banks of the river, we go.

    Here is the mill with the humming of thunder,
      Here is the weir with the wonder of foam,
    Here is the sluice with the race running under--
      Marvelous places, though handy to home!

    Sounds of the village grow stiller and stiller,
      Stiller the note of the birds on the hill;
    Dusty and dim are the eyes of the miller,
      Deaf are his ears with the moil of the mill.

    Years may go by, and the wheel in the river
      Wheel as it wheels for us, children, to-day.
    Wheel and keep roaring and foaming for ever
      Long after all of the boys are away.

    Home from the Indies and home from the ocean,
      Heroes and soldiers we all shall come home;
    Still we shall find the old mill wheel in motion,
      Turning and churning that river to foam.

    You with the bean that I gave when we quarreled,
      I with your marble of Saturday last,
    Honored and old and all gaily apparelled,
      Here we shall meet and remember the past.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE UNSEEN PLAYMATE


    When children are playing alone on the green,
    In comes the playmate that never was seen.
    When children are happy and lonely and good,
    The Friend of the Children comes out of the wood.

    Nobody heard him and nobody saw,
    His is a picture you never could draw,
    But he's sure to be present, abroad or at home,
    When children are happy and playing alone.

    He lies in the laurels, he runs on the grass,
    He sings when you tinkle the musical glass;
    Whene'er you are happy and cannot tell why,
    The Friend of the Children is sure to be by!

    He loves to be little, he hates to be big,
    'Tis he that inhabits the caves that you dig;
    'Tis he when you play with your soldiers of tin
    That sides with the Frenchman and never can win.

    'Tis he, when at night you go off to your bed,
    Bids you go to your sleep and not trouble your head;
    For wherever they're lying, in cupboard or shelf,
    'Tis he will take care of your playthings himself.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




MY SHIP AND I.


    O it's I that am the captain of a tidy little ship,
      Of a ship that goes a-sailing on the pond;
    And my ship it keeps a-turning all around and all about;
    But when I'm a little older, I shall find the secret out
      How to send my vessel sailing on beyond.

    For I mean to grow as little as the dolly at the helm,
      And the dolly I intend to come alive;
    And with him beside to help me, it's a-sailing I shall go,
    It's a-sailing on the water, when the jolly breezes blow
    And the vessel goes a divie-divie dive.

    O it's then you'll see me sailing through the rushes and the reeds,
      And you'll hear the water singing at the prow;
    For beside the dolly sailor, I'm to voyage and explore,
    To land upon the island where no dolly was before,
      And to fire the penny cannon in the bow.

[Illustration]




THE WIND


    I saw you toss the kites on high
    And blow the birds about the sky;
    And all around I heard you pass,
    Like ladies' skirts across the grass--
      O wind, a-blowing all day long!
      O wind, that sings so loud a song!

    I saw the different things you did,
    But always you yourself you hid.
    I felt you push, I heard you call,
    I could not see yourself at all--
      O wind, a-blowing all day long,
      O wind, that sings so loud a song!

    O you that are so strong and cold,
    O blower, are you young or old?
    Are you a beast of field and tree,
    Or just a stronger child than me?
      O wind, a-blowing all day long,
      O wind, that sings so loud a song!

[Illustration: "_I felt you push, I heard you call._"]

[Illustration]




A GOOD BOY


    I woke before the morning, I was happy all the day,
    I never said an ugly word, but smiled and stuck to play.

    And now at last the sun is going down behind the wood,
    And I am very happy, for I know that I've been good.

    My bed is waiting cool and fresh, with linen smooth and fair,
    And I must off to sleepsin-by, and not forget my prayer.

    I know that, till to-morrow I shall see the sun arise,
    No ugly dream shall fright my mind, no ugly sight my eyes.

    But slumber hold me tightly, till I waken in the dawn,
    And hear the thrushes singing in the lilacs round the lawn.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




GOOD AND BAD CHILDREN


    Children, you are very little,
    And your bones are very brittle;
    If you would grow great and stately,
    You must try to walk sedately.

    You must still be bright and quiet,
    And content with simple diet;
    And remain, through all bewild'ring,
    Innocent and honest children.

    Happy hearts and happy faces,
    Happy play in grassy places--
    That was how, in ancient ages,
    Children grew to kings and sages.

    But the unkind and the unruly,
    And the sort who eat unduly,
    They must never hope for glory--
    Theirs is quite a different story!

    Cruel children, crying babies,
    All grow up as geese and gabies,
    Hated, as their age increases,
    By their nephews and their nieces.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




PICTURE-BOOKS IN WINTER


    Summer fading, winter comes--
    Frosty mornings, tingling thumbs,
    Window robins, winter rooks,
    And the picture story-books.

    Water now is turned to stone
    Nurse and I can walk upon;
    Still we find the flowing brooks
    In the picture story-books.

    All the pretty things put by
    Wait upon the childrens' eye,
    Sheep and shepherds, trees and crooks,
    In the picture story-books.

    We may see how all things are,
    Seas and cities, near and far,
    And the flying fairies' looks,
    In the picture story-books.

    How am I to sing your praise,
    Happy chimney-corner days,
    Sitting safe in nursery nooks,
    Reading picture story-books?

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE SWING


    How do you like to go up in a swing,
      Up in the air so blue?
    Oh, I do think it the pleasantest thing
      Ever a child can do!

    Up in the air and over the wall,
      Till I can see so wide,
    Rivers and trees and cattle and all
      Over the countryside--

    Till I look down on the garden green,
      Down on the roof so brown--
    Up in the air I go flying again,
      Up in the air and down!

[Illustration]




A THOUGHT


    It is very nice to think
     The world is full of meat and drink
    With little children saying grace
     In every Christian kind of place.




ARMIES IN THE FIRE


    The lamps now glitter down the street;
    Faintly sound the falling feet
    And the blue even slowly falls
    About the garden trees and walls.

    Now in the falling of the gloom
    The red fire paints the empty room;
    And warmly on the roof it looks,
    And flickers on the backs of books.

    Armies march by tower and spire
    Of cities blazing, in the fire;--
    Till as I gaze with staring eyes,
    The armies fade, the lustre dies.

    Then once again the glow returns;
    Again the phantom city burns;
    And down the red-hot valley, lo!
    The phantom armies marching go!

    Blinking embers, tell me true
    Where are those armies marching to,
    And what the burning city is
    That crumbles in your furnaces!

[Illustration]




MY KINGDOM


    Down by a shining water well
    I found a very little dell,
        No higher than my head.
    The heather and the gorse about
    In summer bloom were coming out,
        Some yellow and some red.

    I called the little pool a sea;
    The little hills were big to me;
        For I am very small.
    I made a boat, I made a town,
    I searched the caverns up and down,
        And named them one and all.

    And all about was mine, I said,
    The little sparrows overhead,
        The little minnows, too.
    This was the world and I was king;
    For me the bees came by to sing,
        For me the swallows flew.

    I played there were no deeper seas,
    Nor any wider plains than these,
        Nor other kings than me.
    At last I heard my mother call
    Out from the house at evenfall,
        To call me home to tea.

    And I must rise and leave my dell,
    And leave my dimpled water well,
        And leave my heather blooms.
    Alas! and as my home I neared,
    How very big my nurse appeared,
        How great and cool the rooms!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




SHADOW MARCH


    All round the house is the jet-black night;
        It stares through the window-pane;
    It crawls in the corners, hiding from the light,
        And it moves with the moving flame.

    Now my little heart goes a-beating like a drum,
        With the breath of Bogie in my hair,
    And all round the candle the crooked shadows come,
        And go marching along up the stair.

    The shadow of the balusters, the shadow of the lamp,
        The shadow of the child that goes to bed--
    All the wicked shadows coming, tramp, tramp, tramp,
        With the black night overhead.

[Illustration]




WINTER-TIME


    Late lies the wintry sun a-bed,
    A frosty, fiery sleepy-head;
    Blinks but an hour or two; and then,
    A blood-red orange, sets again.

    Before the stars have left the skies,
    At morning in the dark I rise;
    And shivering in my nakedness,
    By the cold candle, bathe and dress.

    Close by the jolly fire I sit
    To warm my frozen bones a bit;
    Or with a reindeer-sled, explore
    The colder countries round the door.

    When to go out, my nurse doth wrap
    Me in my comforter and cap;
    The cold wind burns my face and blows
    Its frosty pepper up my nose.

    Black are my steps on silver sod;
    Thick blows my frosty breath abroad;
    And tree and house, and hill and lake,
    Are frosted like a wedding-cake.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE LITTLE LAND


    When at home alone I sit
    And am very tired of it,
    I have just to shut my eyes
    To go sailing through the skies--
    To go sailing far away
    To the pleasant Land of play;
    To the fairy land afar
    Where the Little People are;
    Where the clover-tops are trees,
    And the rain-pools are the seas,
    And the leaves like little ships
    Sail about on tiny trips;
    And above the daisy tree
        Through the grasses,
    High o'erhead the Bumble Bee
        Hums and passes.

    In that forest to and fro
    I can wander, I can go;
    See the spider and the fly,
    And the ants go marching by
    Carrying parcels with their feet
    Down the green and grassy street.
    I can in the sorrel sit
    Where the ladybird alit.
    I can climb the jointed grass;
        And on high
    See the greater swallows pass
        In the sky,
    And the round sun rolling by
    Heeding no such things as I.

    Through that forest I can pass
    Till, as in a looking-glass,
    Humming fly and daisy tree
    And my tiny self I see,
    Painted very clear and neat
    On the rain-pool at my feet.

    Should a leaflet come to land
    Drifting near to where I stand,
    Straight I'll board that tiny boat
    Round the rain-pool sea to float.

    Little thoughtful creatures sit
    On the grassy coasts of it;
    Little things with lovely eyes
    See me sailing with surprise.
    Some are clad in armour green--
    (These have sure to battle been!)--
    Some are pied with ev'ry hue,
    Black and crimson, gold and blue;
    Some have wings and swift are gone;
    But they all look kindly on.

    When my eyes I once again
    Open, and see all things plain;
    High bare walls, great bare floor;
    Great big knobs on drawer and door;
    Great big people perched on chairs,
    Stitching tucks and mending tears,
    Each a hill that I could climb,
    And talking nonsense all the time--
       O dear me,
       That I could be
    A sailor on the rain-pool sea,
    A climber in, the clover tree,
    And just come back, a sleepy-head,
    Late at night to go to bed.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




IN PORT


    Last, to the chamber where I lie
    My fearful footsteps patter nigh,
    And come from out the cold and gloom
    Into my warm and cheerful room.

    There, safe arrived, we turn about
    To keep the coming shadows out,
    And close the happy door at last
    On all the perils that we passed.

    Then, when mamma goes by to bed,
    She shall come in with tip-toe tread,
    And see me lying warm and fast
    And in the Land of Nod at last.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




NIGHT AND DAY


    When the golden day is done,
      Through the closing portal,
    Child and garden, flower and sun,
      Vanish all things mortal.

    As the blinding showers fall,
      As the rays diminish,
    Under evening's cloak they all
      Roll away and vanish.

    Garden darkened, daisy shut,
      Child in bed, they slumber--
    Glow-worm in the highway rut,
      Mice among the lumber.

    In the darkness houses shine,
        Parents move with candles
    Till on all, the night divine
        Turns the bedroom handles.

    Till at last the day begins
        In the east a-breaking,
    In the hedges and the whins
        Sleeping birds a-waking.

    In the darkness shapes of things,
        Houses, trees and hedges,
    Clearer grow; and sparrow's wings
        Beat on window ledges.

    These shall wake the yawning maid,
        She the door shall open--
    Finding dew on garden glade
        And the morning broken.

    There my garden grows again
        Green and rosy painted,
    As at eve behind the pane
        From my eyes it fainted.

    Just as it was shut away,
        Toy-like, in the even,
    Here I see it glow with day
        Under glowing heaven.

    Every path and every plot,
        Every bush of roses,
    Every blue forget-me-not
        Where the dew reposes.

    'Up! they cry, 'the day is come
        On the smiling valleys;
    We have beat the morning drum;
        Playmate, join your allies!'

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




NEST EGGS


    Birds all the sunny day
      Flutter and quarrel
    Here in the arbor-like
      Tent of the laurel.

    Here in the fork
      The brown nest is seated;
    Four little blue eggs
      The mother keeps heated.

    While we stand watching her,
      Staring like gabies,
    Safe in each egg are the
      Bird's little babies.

    Soon the frail eggs they shall
      Chip, and upspringing
    Make all the April woods
      Merry with singing.

    Younger than we are,
      O children, and frailer,
    Soon in blue air they'll be,
      Singer and sailor.

    We, so much older,
      Taller and stronger,
    We shall look down on the
      Birdies no longer.

    They shall go flying
      With musical speeches
    High over head in the
      Tops of the beeches.

    In spite of our wisdom
      And sensible talking,
    We on our feet must go
      Plodding and walking.

[Illustration]




THE FLOWERS


    All the names I know from nurse:
    Gardener's garters, Shepherd's purse,
    Bachelor's buttons, Lady's smock,
    And the Lady Hollyhock.

    Fairy places, fairy things,
    Fairy woods where the wild bee wings,
    Tiny trees for tiny dames--
    These must all be fairy names!

    Tiny woods below whose boughs
    Shady fairies weave a house;
    Tiny tree-tops, rose or thyme,
    Where the braver fairies climb!

    Fair are grown-up people's trees,
    But the fairest woods are these;
    Where if I were not so tall,
    I should live for good and all.

[Illustration]




FROM A RAILWAY CARRIAGE


    Faster than fairies, faster than witches,
    Bridges and houses, hedges and ditches;
    And charging along like troops in a battle,
    All through the meadows the horses and cattle:
    All of the sights of the hill and the plain
    Fly as thick as driving rain;
    And ever again in the wink of an eye,
    Painted stations whistle by.

    Here is a child who clambers and scrambles,
    All by himself and gathering brambles;
    Here is a tramp who stands and gazes;
    And there is the green for stringing the daisies!
    Here is a cart run away in the road
    Lumping along with man and load;
    And here is a mill and there is a river,
    Each a glimpse and gone forever!

[Illustration]




MY TREASURES


    These nuts, that I keep in the back of the nest
    Where all my lead soldiers are lying at rest,
    Were gathered in autumn by nursie and me
    In a wood with a well by the side of the sea.

    This whistle we made (and how clearly it sounds!)
    By the side of a field at the end of the grounds.
    Of a branch of a plane, with a knife of my own,
    It was nursie who made it, and nursie alone!

    The stone, with the white and the yellow and grey,
    We discovered I cannot tell _how_ far away;
    And I carried it back although weary and cold,
    For though father denies it, I'm sure it is gold.

    But of all of my treasures the last is the king,
    For there's very few children possess such a thing;
    And that is a chisel, both handle and blade,
    Which a man who was really a carpenter made.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




BLOCK CITY


    What are you able to build with your blocks?
    Castles and palaces, temples and docks.
    Rain may keep raining and others go roam,
    But I can be happy and building at home.

    Let the sofa be mountains, the carpet be sea,
    There I'll establish a city for me:
    A kirk and a mill and a palace beside,
    And a harbor as well where my vessels may ride.

    Great is the palace with pillar and wall,
    A sort of a tower on the top of it all,
    And steps coming down in an orderly way
    To where my toy vessels lay safe in the bay.

    This one is sailing and that one is moored:
    Hark to the song of the sailors on board!
    And see the steps of my palace, the kings
    Coming and going with presents and things!

    Now I have done with it, down let it go!
    All in a moment the town is laid low.
    Block upon block lying scattered and free,
    What is there left of my town by the sea?

    Yet as I saw it, I see it again,
    The kirk and the palace, the ships and the men
    And as long as I live and where'er I may be,
    I'll always remember my town by the sea.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE GARDENER


    The gardener does not love to talk,
    He makes me keep the gravel walk;
    And when he puts his tools away,
    He locks the door and takes the key.

    Away behind the currant row
    Where no one else but cook may go,
    Far in the plots, I see him dig,
    Old and serious, brown and big.

    He digs the flowers, green, red and blue,
    Nor wishes to be spoken to.
    He digs the flowers and cuts the hay,
    And never seems to want to play.

    Silly gardener! summer goes,
    And winter comes with pinching toes,
    When in the garden bare and brown
    You must lay your barrow down.

    Well now, and while the summer stays,
    To profit by these garden days,
    O how much wiser you would be
    To play at Indian wars with me!

[Illustration]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHILD'S GARDEN OF VERSES***


******* This file should be named 19722.txt or 19722.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/7/2/19722



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
