The Royal Book of Oz
In which the Scarecrow goes to search for his family tree and discovers that he is the Long Lost Emperor of the Silver Island~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Royal Book of Oz, by 
L. Frank Baum and Ruth Plumly Thompson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Royal Book of Oz
       In which the Scarecrow goes to search for his family tree
       and discovers that he is the Long Lost Emperor of the
       Silver Island

Author: L. Frank Baum
        Ruth Plumly Thompson

Illustrator: John R. Neill

Release Date: November 24, 2009 [EBook #30537]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROYAL BOOK OF OZ ***




Produced by Michael Gray




THE ROYAL BOOK OF OZ

In which the Scarecrow goes to search for his family tree and
discovers that he is the Long Lost Emperor of the
Silver Island, and how he was rescued and
brought back to Oz by Dorothy
and the Cowardly Lion

BY

L. FRANK BAUM


ENLARGED AND EDITED
BY

RUTH PLUMLY THOMPSON


ILLUSTRATED BY

JOHN R. NEILL




The Reilly & Lee Co.
Chicago


_Printed in the United States of America_


Copyright, 1921
by
The Reilly & Britton Co.

All Rights Reserved





Dear Children:

You will remember that, in the front part of Glinda of Oz, the
Publishers told you that when Mr. Baum went away from this world he
left behind some unfinished notes about the Princess Ozma and Dorothy
and the jolly people of the Wonderful Land of Oz. The Publishers
promised that they would try to put these notes together into a new
Oz book for you.

Well, here it is--The Royal Book of Oz.

I am sure that Mr. Baum would be pleased that Ruth Plumly Thompson,
who has known and loved the Oz Stories ever since she was a little
girl, has made this new Oz story, with all the Oz folks in it and
true to life.

You see I am Mrs. Baum, the wife of the Royal Historian of Oz, and so
I know how he feels about everything.

Now, about the story:

Of course, we all knew the Scarecrow was a very fine fellow, but
surely we never guessed he ascended from an emperor. Most of us
descend from our ancestors, but the Scarecrow really ASCENDED.

The Scarecrow had a most exciting and adventurous time on the Silver
Isle and Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion just ran out of one adventure
into another trying to rescue him. They made some charming new
friends in their travels--Sir Hokus of Pokes, the Doubtful Dromedary,
and the Comfortable Camel. You'll find them very unusual and likable.
They have the same peculiar, delightful and informal natures that we
love in all the queer Oz people.

Of course every one of us is happy that John R. Neill has drawn the
funny and lovely pictures for the new book. Mr. Neill surely is the
Royal Painter of Oz.

This note is intended for all the children of America, who knew and
loved Mr. Baum, and it goes to each of you with his love and mine.

                 MAUD G. BAUM.

OZCOT
HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA
IN THE SPRING, 1921



LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1   Professor Wogglebug's Great Idea
   2   The Scarecrow's Family Tree
   3   Down the Magic Bean Pole
   4   Dorothy's Lonely Breakfast
   5   Sir Hokus of Pokes
   6   Singing Their Way Out of Pokes
   7   The Scarecrow Is Hailed As Emperor!
   8   The Scarecrow Studies the Silver Island
   9   "Save Us With Your Magic, Exalted One!"
  10  Princess Ozma and Betsy Bobbin Talk It Over
  11  Sir Hokus Overcometh the Giant
  12  Dorothy and Sir Hokus Come to Fix City
  13  Dancing Beds and the Road That Unrolled
  14  Sons and Grandsons Greet the Scarecrow
  15  The Three Princes Plot to Undo the Emperor
  16  Dorothy and Her Guardians Meet New Friends
  17  Doubty and Camy Vanish Into Space
  18  Dorothy Finds the Scarecrow!
  19  Planning to Fly From the Silver Island
  20  Dorothy Upsets the Ceremony of the Island
  21  The Escape From the Silver Island
  22  The Flight of the Parasol
  23  Safe at Last in the Land of Oz
  24  Homeward Bound to the Emerald City



CHAPTER 1

PROFESSOR WOGGLEBUG'S GREAT IDEA

"The very thing!" exclaimed Professor Wogglebug, bounding into the
air and upsetting his gold inkwell. "The very next idea!"

"Who--me?" A round-faced little Munchkin boy stuck his head in the
door and regarded Professor Wogglebug solemnly. He was working his
way through the Professor's Athletic college, and one of his duties
was to wait upon this eminent educator of Oz.

"Certainly not!" snapped Professor Wogglebug. "You're a nobody or a
nothing. Stop gaping and fetch me my hat. I'm off to the Emerald
City. And mind the pupils take their history pills regularly while
I'm gone," he added, clapping his tall hat Zif held out to him on the
back of his head.

"Yes, sir!" said the little Munchkin respectfully.

"Don't hurry back, sir!" This last remark the Professor did not hear,
for he was already half way down the college steps.

"Ozma will be delighted with the idea. How clever I am!" he murmured,
twirling his antennae and walking rapidly down the pleasant blue
lane.

The Professor, whose College of Art and Athletic Perfection is in the
southwestern part of the Munchkin country, is the biggest bug in Oz,
or in anyplace else, for that matter. He has made education painless
by substituting school pills for books. His students take Latin,
history and spelling pills; they swallow knowledge of every kind with
ease and pleasure and spend the rest of their time in sport. No
wonder he is so well thought of in Oz! No wonder he thinks so well of
himself!

Swinging his cane jauntily, the Professor hurried toward the yellow
brick road that leads to the Emerald City, and by nightfall had
reached the lovely capital of Oz.

Oz!--that marvelous country where no one grows old--where animals and
birds talk as sensibly as people, and adventures happen every day.
Indeed, of all fairylands in the world, Oz is the most delightful,
and of all fairy cities, the Emerald City is the most beautiful. A
soft green light shone for miles about, and the gemmed turrets and
spires of the palace flashed more brightly than the stars. But its
loveliness was familiar to Professor Wogglebug, and without a pause
he proceeded to Ozma's palace and was at once admitted to the great
hall.

A roar of merriment greeted his ears. Ozma, the lovely girl ruler of
Oz, was having a party, and the room was full of most surprising
people--surprising to some, that is, but old friends to most of us.

Jack, holding tightly to his pumpkin head, was running as fast as his
wooden feet and wobbly legs would take him from Dorothy. A game of
blind-man's-buff was in full swing, and Scraps and Tik-Tok, the
Scarecrow and Nick Chopper, the Glass Cat and the Cowardly Lion, the
Wizard of Oz and the wooden Sawhorse, Cap'n Bill and Betsy Bobbin,
Billina and the Hungry Tiger were tumbling over each other in an
effort to keep away from the blindfolded little girl.

But Dorothy was too quick for them. With a sudden whirl, she spun
'round and grasped a coatsleeve.

"The Scarecrow!" she laughed triumphantly. "I can tell by the way he
skwoshes--and now _he's_ it!"

"I'm always _it!"_ chuckled the droll person. "But--hah! Behold the
learned Professor standing so aloofly in our midst."

No one had noticed Professor Wogglebug, who had been quietly watching
the game.

"I don't like to interrupt the party," he began, approaching Ozma's
throne apologetically, "but I've just had a most brilliant idea!"

"What? Another?" murmured the Scarecrow, rolling up his eyes.

"Where did you lose it?" asked Jack Pumpkinhead, edging forward
anxiously.

"Lose it! Who said I'd lost it?" snapped the Professor, glaring at
poor Jack.

"Well, you said you'd had it, and had is the past tense, so--" Jack's
voice trailed off uncertainly, and Ozma, seeing he was embarrassed,
begged the Professor to explain.

"Your Highness!" began Professor Wogglebug, while the company settled
down in a resigned circle on the floor, "As Oz is the most
interesting and delightful country on the Continent of Imagination
and its people the most unusual and talented, I am about to compile a
Royal Book which will give the names and history of all our people.
In other words, I am to be the Great, Grand Genealogist of Oz!"

"Whatever that is," the Scarecrow whispered in Dorothy's ear.

"And," the Professor frowned severely on the Scarecrow, "with your
Majesty's permission, I shall start at once!"

"Please do," said the Scarecrow with a wave toward the door, "and we
will go on with the party!"

Scraps, the Patchwork Girl, who had been staring fixedly at the
Professor with her silver suspender-button eyes, now sprang to her
feet:

      "What is a genealogist?
      It's something no one here has missed;
      What puts such notions in your head?
      Turn out your toes--or go to bed!"

she shouted gaily, then, catching Ozma's disapproving glance, fell
over backwards.

"I don't understand it at all," said Jack Pumpkinhead in a depressed
voice. "I'm afraid my head's too ripe."

"Nor I," said Tik-Tok, the copper clockwork man. "Please wind me up a
lit-tle tight-er Dor-o-thy, I want to think!"

Dorothy obligingly took a key suspended from a hook on his back and
wound him up under his left arm. Everybody began to talk at once, and
what with the Cowardly Lion's deep growl and Tik-Tok's squeaky voice
and all the rest of the tin and meat and wooden voices, the confusion
was terrible.

"Wait!" cried Ozma, clapping her hands.

Immediately the room grew so still that one could hear Tik-Tok's
machinery whirring 'round.

"Now!" said Ozma, "One at a time, please, and let us hear from the
Scarecrow first."

The Scarecrow rose. "I think, your Highness," he said modestly, "that
anyone who has studied his Geozify already knows who we are and--"

"Who you are?" broke in the Wogglebug scornfully--"Of course they
do--but _I_ shall tell them who you _were!"_

"Who I were?" gasped the Scarecrow in a dazed voice, raising his
cotton glove to his forehead. "Who I were? Well, who were I?"

"That's just the point," said Professor Wogglebug. "Who were you? Who
were your ancestors? Where is your family? Where is your family tree?
From what did you descend?"

At each question, the Scarecrow looked more embarrassed. He repeated
the last one several times.

"From what did I descend? From what did I descend? Why, from a bean
pole!" he cried.

This was perfectly true, for Dorothy, a little girl blown by a Kansas
cyclone to the Kingdom of Oz, had discovered the Scarecrow in a
farmer's cornfield and had lifted him down from his pole. Together
they had made the journey to the Emerald City, where the Wizard of Oz
had fitted him out with a fine set of brains. At one time, he had
ruled Oz and was generally considered its cleverest citizen.

Before he could reply further, the Patchwork Girl, who was simply
irrepressible, burst out:

      "An ex-straw-ordinary man is he!
      A bean pole for his family tree,
      A Cornishman, upon my soul,
      Descended from a tall, thin Pole!"

"Nonsense!" said Professor Wogglebug sharply, "Being stuffed with
straw may make him extraordinary, but it is quite plain that the
Scarecrow was nobody before he was himself. He has no ancestors, no
family; only a bean pole for a family tree, and is therefore entitled
to the merest mention in the Royal Book of Oz!"

"How about my brains?" asked the Scarecrow in a hurt voice. "Aren't
they enough?"

"Brains have simply nothing to do with royalty!" Professor Wogglebug
waved his fountain pen firmly. "Now--"

"But see here, wasn't I ruler of Oz?" put in the Scarecrow anxiously.

"A Ruler but _never_ a royalty!" snapped out the Professor. "Now, if
you will all answer my questions as I call your names, I'll get the
necessary data and be off."

He took out a small memorandum book.

"Your Highness," he bowed to Ozma, "need not bother. I have already
entered your name at the head of the list. Being descended as you are
from a long line of fairies, your family tree is the oldest and most
illustrious in Oz."

"Princess Dorothy!"

At the sound of her name, the little girl stood up.

"I know you are from Kansas and were created a Princess of Oz by our
gracious Ruler, but can you tell me anything of your ancestors in
America?" demanded the Professor, staring over the top of his thick
glasses.

"You'll have to ask Uncle Henry and Aunt Em," said Dorothy rather
sulkily. The Professor had hurt the feelings of her best friend, the
Scarecrow, and ancestors did not interest her one little bit.

"Very well," said the Professor, writing industriously in his book.
"I'll just enter you as 'Dorothy, Princess of Oz and sixth cousin to
a President!'"

"I'm not!" Dorothy shook her head positively.

"Oh, everyone in America can claim that!" said the Professor easily.

"Nick Chopper!"

Now up rose our old friend the Tin Woodman, who had also been
discovered by Dorothy on her first trip to the Fairyland of Oz.

"You were a man of meat at one time and a woodman by trade?" queried
Professor Wogglebug, poising his pen in the air.

"I am a Tin Woodman, and you may enter me in your book under the name
of Smith, for a tin Smith made me, and as Royal Emperor of the
Winkies, I do not care to go back to my meat connections," said the
Tin Woodman in a dignified voice.

The company applauded, and the Cowardly Lion thumped the floor with
his tail.

"Smith is a very good name. I can work up a whole chapter on that,"
smiled the Professor. The Tin Woodman _had_ once been a regular person,
but a wicked witch enchanted his ax, and first it chopped off one
leg, then the other, and next both arms and his head. After each
accident, Nick went to a tinsmith for repairs, and finally was
entirely made of tin. Nowhere but in Oz could such a thing happen.
But no one can be killed in this marvelous country, and Nick, with
his tin body, went gaily on living and was considered so
distinguished that the Winkies had begged him to be their Emperor.

"Scraps!" called the Professor as Nick sat stiffly down beside
Dorothy.

The Patchwork Girl pirouetted madly to the front. Putting one finger
in her mouth, she sang:

      "I'm made of patches, as you see.
      A clothes tree is my family tree
      But, pshaw! It's all the same to me!"

A clothes tree? Even Professor Wogglebug grinned. Who could help
laughing at Scraps? Made of odd pieces of goods and brought to life
by the powder of life, the comical girl was the jolliest person
imaginable.

"Put me down as a man of me-tal!" drawled Tik-Tok the copper man as
the laugh following Scraps' rhyme had subsided. Tik-Tok was still
another of Dorothy's discoveries, and this marvelous machine man,
guaranteed to last a thousand years, could think, walk, and talk when
properly wound.

The Cowardly Lion was entered as a King in his own right. One after
the other, the celebrities of Oz came forward to answer Professor
Wogglebug's questions. The Professor wrote rapidly in his little
book. Ozma listened attentively to each one, and they all seemed
interested except the Scarecrow. Slumped down beside Dorothy, he
stared morosely at the ceiling, his jolly face all wrinkled down on
one side.

"If I only knew who I were!" he muttered over and over. "I must
think!"

"Don't you mind." Dorothy patted his shoulder kindly. "Royalties are
out of date, and I'll bet the Professor's family tree was a
milkweed!"

But the Scarecrow refused to be comforted, and long after the company
had retired he sat hunched sadly in his corner.

"I'll do it! I'll do it!" he exclaimed at last, rising unsteadily to
his feet. Jellia Jamb, Ozma's little waiting maid, returning somewhat
later to fetch a handkerchief her mistress had dropped, was surprised
to see him running through the long hall.

"Why, where are you going?" asked Jellia.

"To find my family tree!" said the Scarecrow darkly, and drawing
himself up to his full height, he fell through the doorway.



CHAPTER 2

THE SCARECROW'S FAMILY TREE

The moon shone brightly, but everyone in the Emerald City was fast
asleep! Through the deserted streets hurried the Scarecrow. For the
first time since his discovery by little Dorothy, he was really
unhappy. Living as he did in a Fairyland, he had taken many things
for granted and had rather prided himself on his unusual appearance.
Indeed, not until Professor Wogglebug's rude remarks concerning his
family had he given his past a thought.

"I am the only person in Oz without a family!" he reflected
sorrowfully. "Even the Cowardly Lion has kingly parents and a palm
tree! But I must keep thinking. My brains have never failed me yet.
Who was I? Who were I? Who were I?"

Often he thought so hard that he forgot to look where he was going
and ran headlong into fences, stumbled down gutters, and over stiles.
But fortunately, the dear fellow could not hurt himself, and he would
struggle up, pat his straw into shape, and walk straightway into
something else. He made good time in between falls, however, and was
soon well on his way down the yellow brick road that ran through the
Munchkin Country. For he had determined to return to the Munchkin
farm where Dorothy had first discovered him and try to find some
traces of his family.

Now being stuffed with straw had many advantages, for requiring
neither food nor sleep the Scarecrow could travel night and day
without interruption. The stars winked out one by one, and by the
time the cocks of the Munchkin farmers began to crow, he had come to
the banks of a broad blue river!

The Scarecrow took off his hat and scratched his head thoughtfully.
Crossing rivers is no easy matter in Oz, for there isn't a ferry in
the Kingdom, and unless one is a good swimmer or equipped with some
of the Wizard's magic it is mighty troublesome. Water does not agree
with the Scarecrow at all, and as for swimming, he can no more swim
than a bag of meal.

But he was too wise a person to give up merely because a thing
appeared to be impossible. It was for just such emergencies that his
excellent brains had been given to him.

"If Nick Chopper were here, he would build a raft in no time,"
murmured the Scarecrow, "but as he is not, I must think of another
way!"

Turning his back on the river, which distracted his mind, he began to
think with all his might. Before he could collect his thoughts, there
was a tremendous crash, and next minute he was lying face down in the
mud. Several little crashes followed, and a shower of water. Then a
wet voice called out with a cheerful chuckle:

"Come on out, my dear Rattles. Not a bad place at all, and here's
breakfast already waiting!"

"Breakfast!" The Scarecrow turned over cautiously. A huge and curious
creature was slashing through the grass toward him. A smaller and
still more curious one followed. Both were extremely damp and had
evidently just come out of the river.

"Good morning!" quavered the Scarecrow, sitting up with a jerk and at
the same time reaching for a stick that lay just behind him.

"I won't eat it if it talks--so there!" The smaller creature stopped
and stared fixedly at the Scarecrow.

The Scarecrow, hearing this, tried to think of something else to say,
but the appearance of the two was so amazing that, as he told Dorothy
afterwards, he was struck dumb. The larger was at least two hundred
feet long and made entirely of blocks of wood. On each block was a
letter of the alphabet. The head was a huge square block with a
serpent's face and long, curling, tape-measure tongue. The little
one was very much smaller and seemed to consist of hundreds of
rattles, wood, celluloid, and rubber, fastened together with wires.
Every time it moved, the rattles tinkled. Its face, however, was not
unpleasant, so the Scarecrow took heart and made a deep bow.

"And I'm not going to eat anything that squirms." This time it was
the big serpent who spoke.

"Thank you!" said the Scarecrow, bowing several times more. "You
relieve my mind. I've never been a breakfast yet, and I'd rather not
begin. But if I cannot be your breakfast, let me be your friend!" He
extended his arms impulsively.

There was something so jolly about the Scarecrow's smile that the two
creatures became friendly at once, and moreover told him the story of
their lives.

"As you have doubtless noted," began the larger creature, "I am an
A-B-Sea Serpent. I am employed in the nursery of the Mer children to
teach them their letters. My friend, here, is a Rattlesnake, and it
is his business to amuse the Mer babies while the Mermaids are
mer-marketing. Once a year, we take a vacation, and proceeding from the
sea depths up a strange river, we came out upon this shore. Perhaps
you, Sir, will be able to tell us where we are?"

"You are in the Munchkin Country of the Land of Oz," explained the
Scarecrow politely. "It is a charming place for a vacation. I would
show you about myself if I were not bound on an important mission."
Here the Scarecrow sighed deeply.

"Have you a family?" he asked the A-B-Sea Serpent curiously.

"Yes, indeed," replied the monster, snapping its tape-measure tongue
in and out, "I have five great-grandmothers, twenty-one grandnieces,
seven brothers, and six sisters-in-law!"

"Ah!" murmured the Scarecrow, clasping his hands tragically, "How I
envy you. I have no one--no aunts--no ancestors--no family--no family
tree but a bean pole. I am, alas, a man without a _past!"_ The
Scarecrow looked so dejected that the Rattlesnake thought he was
going to cry.

"Oh, cheer up!" it begged in a distressed voice. "Think of your
_presence_--here--I give you permission to shake me!" The Scarecrow
was so affected by this kind offer that he cheered up immediately.

"No past but a presence--I'll remember that!" He swelled out his
straw chest complacently, and leaning over, stroked the Rattlesnake
on the head.

"Are you good at riddles?" asked the Rattlesnake timidly.

"Well," answered the Scarecrow judiciously, "I have very good brains,
given me by the famous Wizard of Oz."

"Then why is the A-B-Sea Serpent like a city?" asked the Rattlesnake
promptly.

The Scarecrow thought hard for several seconds.

"Because it is made up of blocks!" he roared triumphantly. "That's
easy; now it's my turn. Why is the A-B-Sea Serpent such a slow
talker?"

"Give it up!" said the Rattlesnake after shaking himself several
times.

"Because his tongue is a tape measure, and he has to measure his
words!" cried the Scarecrow, snapping his clumsy fingers. "And that's
a good one, if I did make it myself. I must remember to tell it to
Dorothy!"

Then he sobered quite suddenly, for the thought of Dorothy brought
back the purpose of his journey. Interrupting the Rattlesnake in the
midst of a new riddle, he explained how anxious he was to return to
the little farm where he had been discovered and try to find some
traces of his family.

"And the real riddle," he sighed with a wave of his hand, "is how to
cross this river."

"That's easy and no riddle at all," rumbled the A-B-Sea Serpent, who
had been listening attentively to the Scarecrow's remarks. "I'll
stretch across, and you can walk over." Suiting the action to the
word, he began backing very cautiously toward the river so as not to
shake the Scarecrow off his feet.

"Mind your P's and Q's!" called the Rattlesnake warningly. It was
well that he spoke, for the A-B-Sea Serpent had doubled the P and Q
blocks under, and they were ready to snap off. Finally, however, he
managed to make a bridge of himself, and the Scarecrow stepped easily
over the blocks, the huge serpent holding himself rigid. Just as he
reached Y, the unfortunate creature sneezed, and all the blocks
rattled together. Up flew the Scarecrow and escaped falling into the
stream only by the narrowest margin.

"Blockhead!" shrilled the Rattlesnake, who had taken a great fancy to
the Scarecrow.

"I'm all right," cried the Scarecrow rather breathlessly. "Thank you
very much!" He sprang nimbly up the bank. "Hope you have a pleasant
vacation!"

"Can't, with a rattlepate like that." The A-B-Sea Serpent nodded
glumly in the Rattlesnake's direction.

"Now don't quarrel," begged the Scarecrow. "You are both charming and
unusual, and if you follow that Yellow Road, you will come to the
Emerald City, and Ozma will be delighted to welcome you."

"The Emerald City! We must see that, my dear Rattles." Forgetting his
momentary displeasure, the A-B-Sea Serpent pulled himself out of the
river, and waving his X Y Z blocks in farewell to the Scarecrow, went
clattering down the road, the little Rattlesnake rattling along
behind him.

As for the Scarecrow, he continued his journey, and the day was so
delightful and the country so pleasant that he almost forgot he had
no family. He was treated everywhere with the greatest courtesy and
had innumerable invitations from the hospitable Munchkins. He was
anxious to reach his destination, however, so he refused them all,
and traveling night and day came without further mishap or adventure
late on the second evening to the little Munchkin farm where Dorothy
had first discovered him. He was curious to know whether the pole on
which he had been hoisted to scare away the crows still stood in the
cornfield and whether the farmer who had made him could tell him
anything further about his history.

"It is a shame to waken him," thought the kind Scarecrow. "I'll just
take a look in the cornfield." The moon shone so brightly that he had
no trouble finding his way about. With a little cry of pleasure, he
pushed his way through the dry cornstalks. There in the center of the
field stood a tall pole--the very identical bean pole from which he
had descended.

"All the family or family tree I've got!" cried the Scarecrow,
running toward it with emotion.

"What's that?" A window in the farmhouse was thrown up, and a sleepy
Munchkin thrust out his head. "What are you doing?" he called
crossly.

"Thinking!" said the Scarecrow, leaning heavily against the bean
pole.

"Well, don't do it out loud," snapped the farmer. Then, catching a
better view of the Scarecrow, he cried in surprise: "Why, it's you!--
Come right in, my dear fellow, and give us the latest news from the
Emerald City. I'll fetch a candle!"

The farmer was very proud of the Scarecrow. He had made him long ago
by stuffing one of his old suits with straw, painting a jolly face on
a sack, stuffing that, and fastening the two together. Red boots, a
hat, and yellow gloves had finished his man--and nothing could have
been jollier than the result. Later on, when the Scarecrow had run
off with Dorothy and got his brains from the Wizard of Oz and become
ruler of the Emerald City, the little farmer had felt highly
gratified.

The Scarecrow, however, was not in a humor for conversation. He
wanted to think in peace. "Don't bother!" he called up. "I'm going to
spend the night here. I'll see you in the morning."

"All right! Take care of yourself," yawned the farmer, and drew in
his head.

For a long time the Scarecrow stood perfectly still beside the bean
pole--thinking. Then he got a spade from the shed and began clearing
away the cornstalks and dried leaves from around the base of the
pole. It was slow work, for his fingers were clumsy, but he
persevered. Then a wonderful idea came to him.

"Perhaps if I dig down a bit, I may discover--" He got no further,
for at the word "discover," he pushed the spade down with all his
might. There was a loud crash. The bottom dropped out of things, and
the Scarecrow fell through.

"Gr-eat cornstalks!" cried the Scarecrow, throwing up his arms. To
his surprise, they came in contact with a stout pole, which he
embraced. It was a lifesaver, for he was shooting down into the
darkness at a great rate.

"Why!" he gasped as soon as he regained his breath, for he was
falling at a terrific rate of speed, "Why, I believe I'm sliding down
the _bean pole!"_



CHAPTER 3

DOWN THE MAGIC BEAN POLE

Hugging the bean pole for dear life, the Scarecrow slid rapidly
downward, Everything was dark, but at times a confused roaring
sounded in his ears.

"Father, I hear something falling past!" shouted a gruff voice all at
once.

"Then reach out and pull it in," growled a still deeper voice. There
was a flash of light, a door opened suddenly, and a giant hand
snatched the air just above the Scarecrow's head.

"It's a good thing I haven't a heart to fail me," murmured the
Scarecrow, glancing up fearfully and clinging more tightly to the
pole. "Though I fall, I shall not falter. But where under the earth
am I falling to?" At that minute, a door opened far below, and
someone called up:

"Who are you? Have out your toll and be ready to salute the Royal
Ruler of the Middlings!"

The Scarecrow had learned in the course of his many and strange
adventures that it was best to accede to every request that was
reasonable or possible. Realizing that unless he answered at once he
would fall past his strange questioners, he shouted amiably:

"I am the Scarecrow of Oz, sliding down my family tree!" The words
echoed oddly in the narrow passageway, and by the time he reached the
word "tree" the Scarecrow could make out two large brown men leaning
from a door somewhere below. Next minute he came to a sharp stop. A
board had shot out and closed off the passageway. So sudden was the
stop that the Scarecrow was tossed violently upward. While he
endeavored to regain his balance, the two Middlings eyed him
curiously.

"So this is the kind of thing they grow on top," said one, holding a
lantern close to the Scarecrow's head.

"Toll, Toll!" droned the other, holding out a horribly twisted hand.

"One moment, your Royal Middleness!" cried the Scarecrow, backing as
far away from the lantern as he could, for with a straw stuffing one
cannot be too careful of fire. He felt in his pocket for an emerald
he had picked up in the Emerald City a few days before and handed it
gingerly to the Muddy monarch.

"Why do you call me Middleness?" the King demanded angrily, taking
the emerald.

"Is your kingdom not in the middle of the earth, and are you not
royalty? What could be more proper than Royal Middleness?" asked the
Scarecrow, flecking the dust from his hat.

Now that he had a better view, he saw that _the two were entirely men
of mud,_ and very roughly put together. Dried grass hair stood erect
upon each head, and their faces were large and lumpy and had a
disconcerting way of changing shape. Indeed, when the King leaned
over to examine the Scarecrow, his features were so soft they seemed
to run into his cheek, which hung down alarmingly, while his nose
turned sideways and lengthened at least an inch!

Muddle pushed the King's nose back and began spreading his cheek into
place. Instead of hands and feet, the Middlings had gnarled and
twisted roots which curled up in a perfectly terrifying manner. Their
teeth were gold, and their eyes shone like small electric lights.
They wore stiff coats of dried mud, buttoned clumsily with lumps of
coal, and the King had a tall mud crown. Altogether, the Scarecrow
thought he had never seen more disagreeable looking creatures.

"What he needs," spluttered the King, fingering the jewel greedily,
"is a coat of mud! Shall we pull him in, Muddle?"

"He's very poorly made, your Mudjesty. Can you work, Carescrow?"
asked Muddle, thumping him rudely in the chest.

"Scarecrow, if you please!" The Scarecrow drew himself up and spoke
with great difficulty. "I can work with my head!" he added proudly.

"Your head!" roared the King. "Did you hear that, Muddle? He works
with his head. What's the matter with your hands?" Again the King
lunged forward, and this time his face fell on the other side and had
bulged enormously before Muddle could pat it into shape. They began
whispering excitedly together, but the Scarecrow made no reply, for
looking over their shoulder he glimpsed a dark, forbidding cavern
lighted only by the flashing red eyes of thousands of Middlings. They
appeared to be digging, and above the rattle of the shovels and picks
came the hoarse voice of one of them singing the Middling National
Air. Or so the Scarecrow gathered from the words:

      "Oh, chop the brown clods as they fall with a thud!
      Three croaks for the Middlings, who stick in the Mud.
      Oh, mud, rich and wormy! Oh, mud, sweet and squirmy!
      Oh what is so lovely as Mud! Oh what is so lovely as Mud!
      Three croaks for the Middlings, who delve all the day
      In their beautiful Kingdom of soft mud and clay!"

The croaks that came at the end of the song were so terrifying that
the Scarecrow shivered in spite of himself.

"Ugh! Hardly a place for a pleasant visit!" he gasped, flattening
himself against the wall of the passage. Feeling that matters had
gone far enough, he repeated in a loud voice:

"I am the Scarecrow of Oz and desire to continue my fall. I have paid
my toll and unless your Royal Middleness release me--"

"Might as well drop him--a useless creature!" whispered Muddle, and
before the King had time to object, he jerked the board back. "Fall
on!" he screeched maliciously, and the Scarecrow shot down into the
darkness, the hoarse screams of the two Middlings echoing after him
through the gloom.

No use trying to think! The poor Scarecrow bumped and banged from
side to side of the passage. It was all he could do to keep hold of
the bean pole, so swiftly was he falling.

"A good thing I'm not made of meat like little Dorothy," he wheezed
breathlessly. His gloves were getting worn through from friction with
the pole, and the rush of air past his ears was so confusing that he
gave up all idea of thinking. Even magic brains refuse to work under
such conditions. Down--down--down he plunged till he lost all count
of time. Down--down--down--hours and hours! Would he never stop?
Then suddenly it grew quite light, and he flashed through what
appeared to be a hole in the roof of a huge silver palace, whirled
down several stories and landed in a heap on the floor of a great
hall. In one hand he clutched a small fan, and in the other a parasol
that had snapped off the beanstalk just before he reached the palace
roof.

Shaken and bent over double though he was, the Scarecrow could see
that he had fallen into a company of great magnificence. He had a
confused glimpse of silken clad courtiers, embroidered screens,
inlaid floors, and flashing silver lanterns, when there was a
thundering bang that hurled him halfway to the roof again. Falling to
a sitting position and still clinging to the bean pole, he saw two
giant kettle drums nearby, still vibrating from the terrible blows
they had received.

The company were staring at him solemnly, and as he attempted to
rise, they fell prostrate on their faces. Up flew the poor flimsy
Scarecrow again, such was the draught, and this time landed on his
face. He was beginning to feel terribly annoyed, but before he could
open his mouth or stand up, a deep voice boomed:

"He has come!"

"He has come!" shrilled the rest of the company, thumping their heads
on the stone floor. The language seemed strange to the Scarecrow, but
oddly enough, he could understand it perfectly. Keeping a tight grasp
on the bean pole, he gazed at the prostrate assemblage, too
astonished to speak. They looked exactly like the pictures of some
Chinamen he had seen in one of Dorothy's picture books back in Oz,
but instead of being yellow, their skin was a curious gray, and the
hair of old and young alike was silver and worn in long, stiff
queues. Before he had time to observe any more, an old, old courtier
hobbled forward and beckoned imperiously to a page at the door. The
page immediately unfurled a huge silk umbrella and, running forward,
held it over the Scarecrow's head.

"Welcome home, sublime and noble Ancestor! Welcome, honorable and
exalted Sir." The old gentleman made several deep salaams.

"Welcome, immortal and illustrious Ancestor! Welcome, ancient and
serene Father!" cried the others, banging their heads hard on the
floor--so hard that their queues flew into the air.

"Ancestor! Father!" mumbled the Scarecrow in a puzzled voice. Then,
collecting himself somewhat, he made a deep bow, and sweeping off his
hat with a truly royal gesture began: "I am indeed honored--" But he
got no farther. The silken clad courtiers sprang to their feet in a
frenzy of joy. A dozen seized him bodily and carried him to a great
silver throne room.

"The same beautiful voice!" cried the ancient gentleman, clasping his
hands in an ecstasy of feeling.

"It is he! The Emperor! The Emperor has returned! Long live the
Emperor!" shouted everyone at once. The confusion grew worse and
worse.

"Ancestor! Father! Emperor!" The Scarecrow could scarcely believe his
ears. "For a fallen man, I am rising like yeast!" he murmured to
himself. Half a dozen courtiers had run outdoors to spread the
wonderful news, and soon silver gongs and bells began ringing all
over the kingdom, and cries of "The Emperor! The Emperor!" added to
the general excitement. Holding fast to the sides of the throne and
still grasping the little fan and parasol, the Scarecrow sat blinking
with embarrassment.

"If they would just stop emperoring, I could ask them who I am,"
thought the poor Scarecrow. As if in answer to his thoughts, the
tottery old nobleman raised his long arm, and at once the hall became
absolutely silent.

"Now!" sighed the Scarecrow, leaning forward. "Now I shall hear
something of interest."



CHAPTER 4

DOROTHY'S LONELY BREAKFAST

Dorothy, who occupied one of the coziest apartments in Ozma's palace,
wakened the morning after the party with a feeling of great
uneasiness. At breakfast, the Scarecrow was missing. Although he, the
Tin Woodman and Scraps did not require food, they always livened up
the table with their conversation. Ordinarily Dorothy would have
thought nothing of the Scarecrow's absence, but she could not forget
his distressed expression when Professor Wogglebug had so rudely
remarked on his family tree. The Professor himself had left before
breakfast, and everybody but Dorothy had forgotten all about the
Royal Book of Oz.

Already many of Ozma's guests who did not live in the palace were
preparing to depart, but Dorothy could not get over her feeling of
uneasiness. The Scarecrow was her very best friend, and it was not
like him to go without saying goodbye. So she hunted through the
gardens and in every room of the palace and questioned all the
servants. Unfortunately, Jellia Jamb, who was the only one who had
seen the Scarecrow go, was with her mistress. Ozma always breakfasted
alone and spent the morning over state matters. Knowing how busy she
was, Dorothy did not like to disturb her. Betsy Bobbin and Trot, real
little girls like Dorothy, also lived in the Fairy palace, and Ozma
was a great chum for them. But the Kingdom of Oz had to be governed
in between times, and they all knew that unless Ozma had the mornings
to herself, she could not play with them in the afternoons. So
Dorothy searched by herself.

"Perhaps I didn't look hard enough," thought the little girl, and
searched the palace all over again.

"Don't worry," advised the Tin Woodman, who was playing checkers with
Scraps. "He's probably gone home."

      "He is a man of brains; why worry
      Because he's left us in a hurry?"

chuckled Scraps with a careless wave of her hand, and Dorothy,
laughing in spite of herself, ran out to have another look in the
garden.

"That is just what he has done, and if I hurry, I may overtake him.
Anyway, I believe I'll go and pay him a visit," thought Dorothy.

Trot and Betsy Bobbin were swinging in one of the royal hammocks, and
when Dorothy invited them to go along, they explained that they were
going on a picnic with the Tin Woodman. So without waiting to ask
anyone else or even whistling for Toto, her little dog, Dorothy
skipped out of the garden.

The Cowardly Lion, half asleep under a rose bush, caught a glimpse of
her blue dress flashing by, and bounding to his feet thudded after
her.

"Where are you going?" he asked, stifling a giant yawn.

"To visit the Scarecrow," explained Dorothy. "He looked so unhappy
last night. I am afraid he is worrying about his family tree, and I
thought p'raps I could cheer him up."

The Cowardly Lion stretched luxuriously. "I'll go too," he rumbled,
giving himself a shake. "But it's the first time I ever heard of the
Scarecrow worrying."

"But you see," Dorothy said gently, "Professor Wogglebug told him he
had no family."

"Family! Family fiddlesticks! Hasn't he got us?" The Cowardly Lion
stopped and waved his tail indignantly.

"Why, you dear old thing!" Dorothy threw her arms around his neck.
"You've given me a lovely idea!" The Cowardly Lion tried not to look
pleased.

"Well, as long as I've given it to you, you might tell me what it
is," he suggested mildly.

"Why," said Dorothy, skipping along happily, "we'll let him adopt us
and be his really relations. I'll be his sister, and you'll be--"

"His cousin--that is, if you think he wouldn't mind having a great
coward like me for a cousin," finished the Cowardly Lion in an
anxious voice.

"Do you still feel as cowardly as ever?" asked Dorothy
sympathetically.

"More so!" sighed the great beast, glancing apprehensively over his
shoulder. This made Dorothy laugh, for although the lion trembled
like a cup custard at the approach of danger, he always managed to
fight with great valor, and the little girl felt safer with him than
with the whole army of Oz, who never were frightened but who always
ran away.

Now anyone who is at all familiar with his geozify knows that the
Fairyland of Oz is divided into four parts, exactly like a parchesi
board, with the Emerald City in the very center, the purple Gillikin
Country to the north, the red Quadling Country to the south, the blue
Munchkin Country to the east, and the yellow Country of the Winkies
to the west. It was toward the west that Dorothy and the Cowardly
Lion turned their steps, for it was in the Winkie Country that the
Scarecrow had built his gorgeous golden tower in exactly the shape of
a huge ear of corn.

Dorothy ran along beside the Cowardly Lion, chatting over their many
adventures in Oz, and stopping now and then to pick buttercups and
daisies that dotted the roadside. She tied a big bunch to the tip of
her friend's tail and twined some more in his mane, so that he
presented a very festive appearance indeed. Then, when she grew
tired, she climbed on his big back, and swiftly they jogged through
the pleasant land of the Winkies. The people waved to them from
windows and fields, for everyone loved little Dorothy and the big
lion, and as they passed a neat yellow cottage, a little Winkie Lady
came running down the path with a cup of tea in one hand and a bucket
in the other.

"I saw you coming and thought you might be thirsty," she called
hospitably. Dorothy drank her cup without alighting.

"We're in an awful hurry; we're visiting the Scarecrow," she
exclaimed apologetically. The lion drank his bucket of tea at one
gulp. It was so hot that it made his eyes water.

"How I loathe tea! If I hadn't been such a coward, I'd have upset the
bucket," groaned the lion as the little Winkie Lady went back into
her house. "But no, I was afraid of hurting her feelings. Ugh, what a
terrible thing it is to be a coward!"

"Nonsense!" said Dorothy, wiping her eyes with her handkerchief.
"You're not a coward, you're just polite. But let's run very fast so
we can reach the Scarecrow's in time for lunch."

So like the wind away raced the Cowardly Lion, Dorothy holding fast
to his mane, with her curls blowing straight out behind, and in
exactly two Oz hours and seventeen Winkie minutes they came to the
dazzling corn-ear residence of their old friend. Hurrying through the
cornfields that surrounded his singular mansion, Dorothy and the
Cowardly Lion rushed through the open door.

"We've come for lunch," announced Dorothy.

"And I'm hungry enough to eat crow," rumbled the lion. Then both
stopped in dismay, for the big reception room was empty. From a room
above came a shuffling of feet, and Blink, the Scarecrow's
gentlemanly housekeeper, came running down the stairs.

"Where's the Scarecrow?" asked Dorothy anxiously. "Isn't he here?"

"Here! Isn't he there? Isn't he in the Emerald City?" gasped the
little Winkie, putting his specs on upside down.

"No--at least, I don't think so. Oh, dear, I just felt that something
had happened to him!" wailed Dorothy, sinking into an ebony armchair
and fanning herself with a silk sofa cushion.

"Now don't be alarmed." The Cowardly Lion rushed to Dorothy's side
and knocked three vases and a clock off a little table, just to show
how calm he was. "Think of his brains! The Scarecrow has never come
to harm yet, and all we have to do is to return to the Emerald City
and look in Ozma's Magic Picture. Then, when we know where he is, we
can go and find him and tell him about our little adoption plan," he
added, looking hopefully at Dorothy.

"The Scarecrow himself couldn't have spoken more sensibly," observed
Blink with a great sigh of relief, and even Dorothy felt better.

In Ozma's palace, as many of you know, there is a Magic Picture, and
when Ozma or Dorothy want to see any of their friends, they have
merely to wish to see them, and instantly the picture shows the
person wished for and exactly what he is doing at that certain time.

"Of course!" sighed Dorothy. "Why didn't I think of it myself?"

"Better have some lunch before you start back," suggested Blink, and
bustling about had soon set out an appetizing repast. Dorothy was too
busy worrying about the Scarecrow to have much appetite, but the
Cowardly Lion swallowed seventeen roasts and a bucket of corn syrup.

"To give me courage!" he explained to Dorothy, licking his chops.
"There's nothing that makes me so cowardly as an empty stomach!"

It was quite late in the afternoon before they could get away. Blink
insisted on putting up a lunch, and it took some time to make enough
sandwiches for the Cowardly Lion. But at last it was ready and packed
into an old hat box belonging to Mops, the Scarecrow's cook. Then
Dorothy, balancing the box carefully on her lap, climbed on the
Cowardly Lion's back, and assuring Blink that they would return in a
few days with his master, they bade him farewell. Blink almost
spoiled things by bursting into tears, but he managed to restrain
himself long enough to say goodbye, and Dorothy and the Cowardly
Lion, feeling a little solemn themselves, started toward the Emerald
City.

"My, but it's growing dark," said Dorothy after they had gone several
miles. "I believe it's going to storm."

Scarcely had she finished speaking before there was a terrific crash
of thunder. The Cowardly Lion promptly sat down. Off of his back
bounced the sandwich box and into the sandwich box rolled Dorothy,
head first.

"How terribly upsetting," coughed the Cowardly Lion.

"I should say it was!" Dorothy crawled indignantly out of the hat box
and began wiping the butter from her nose. "You've simply ruined the
supper!"

"It was my heart," explained the Cowardly Lion sorrowfully. "It
jumped so hard that it upset me, but climb on my back again, and I'll
run very fast to some place of shelter."

"But where are you?" Dorothy asked in real alarm, for it had grown
absolutely dark.

"Here," quavered the Cowardly Lion, and guided by his voice, Dorothy
stumbled over to him and climbed again on his back. One crash of
thunder followed another, and at each crash the Cowardly Lion leapt
forward a bit faster until they fairly flew through the dark.

"It won't take us long to reach the Emerald City at this rate!"
called Dorothy, but the wind tossed the words far behind her, and
seeing that conversation was impossible, she clung fast to the lion's
mane and began thinking about the Scarecrow. The thunder continued at
frequent intervals, but there was no rain, and after they had been
running for what seemed to Dorothy hours and hours, a sudden terrific
bump sent her flying over the lion's head into a bush. Too breathless
to speak, she felt herself carefully all over. Then, finding that she
was still in one piece, she called to the Cowardly Lion. She could
hear him moaning and muttering about his heart.

"Any bones broken?" she asked anxiously.

"Only my head," groaned the lion dismally. Just then the darkness
lifted as suddenly as it had fallen, and Dorothy saw him leaning
against a tree with his eyes closed. There was a big bump on his
head. With a little cry of sympathy, Dorothy hurried toward him, when
all at once something strange about their surroundings struck her.

"Why, where are we?" cried the little girl, stopping short. The
lion's eyes flew open, and forgetting all about his bump, he looked
around in dismay. No sign of the Emerald City anywhere. Indeed, they
were in a great, dim forest, and considering the number of trees, it
is a wonder that they had not run into one long ago.

"I must have run the wrong way," faltered the Cowardly Lion in a
distressed voice.

"You couldn't help that; anyone would lose his way in the dark," said
Dorothy generously. "But I wish we hadn't fallen in the sandwiches.
I'm hungry!"

"So am I. Do you think anyone lives in this forest, Dorothy?"

Dorothy did not answer, for just then she caught sight of a big sign
nailed to one of the trees.

"Turn to the right," directed the sign.

"Oh, come on!" cried Dorothy, cheering up immediately. "I believe
we're going to have another adventure."

"I'd rather have some supper," sighed the Cowardly Lion wistfully,
"but unless we want to spend the night here, we might as well move
along. I'm to be fed up on adventure, I suppose."

"Turn to the left," advised the next sign, and the two turned
obediently and hurried on, trying to keep a straight course through
the trees. In a Fairyland like Oz, where there are no trains or
trolleys or even horses for traveling ('cepting Ozma's sawhorse),
there are bound to be unexplored portions. And though Dorothy had
been at one time or another in almost every part of Oz, the country
through which they were now passing was totally unfamiliar to her.
Night was coming on, and it was growing so dark that she could hardly
read the third sign when they presently came upon it.

"Don't sing," directed the sign sternly.

"Sing!" snapped Dorothy indignantly, "Who wants to sing?"

"We might as well keep to the left," said the Cowardly Lion in a
resigned voice, and they walked along for some time in silence. The
trees were thinning out, and as they came to the edge of the forest,
another sign confronted them.

"Slow down," read Dorothy with great difficulty. "What nonsense! If
we slow down, how shall we ever get anywhere?"

"Wait a minute," mused the Cowardly Lion, half closing his eyes.
"Aren't there two roads just ahead, one going up and one going down?
We're to take the down road, I suppose. 'Slow down,' isn't that what
it says?"

Slow down it surely was, for the road was so steep and full of stones
that Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion had to pick their way with utmost
care. But even bad roads must end somewhere, and coming suddenly to
the edge of the woods, they saw a great city lying just below. A dim
light burned over the main gate, and toward this the Cowardly Lion
and Dorothy hurried as fast as they could. This was not very fast,
for an unaccountable drowsiness was stealing over them.

Slowly and more slowly, the tired little girl and her great
four-footed companion advanced toward the dimly lighted gate. They were
so drowsy that they had ceased to talk. But they dragged on.

"Hah, hoh, hum!" yawned the Cowardly Lion. "What makes my feet so
heavy?"

He stopped short and examined each of his four feet sleepily.

Dorothy swallowed a yawn and tried to run, but a walk was all she
could manage.

"Hah, hoh, hum!" she gaped, stumbling along with her eyes closed.

By the time they had reached the gate, they were yawning so hard that
the Cowardly Lion had nearly dislocated his jaw, and Dorothy was
perfectly breathless. Holding to the lion's mane to steady herself,
Dorothy blinked up uncertainly at the sign over the gate.

"Hah--here we are--Hoh!" She held her hand wearily before her mouth.

Then, with a great effort, she read the words of the sign.

"Um--Great--Grand and Mighty Slow Kingdom of Pokes! Uh-hah--Pokes! Do
you hear? Hah, hoh, hu, uum!"

Dorothy looked about in alarm, despite her sleepiness.

"Do you hear?" she repeated anxiously as no answer came through the
gloom.

The Cowardly Lion did not hear. He had fallen down and was fast
asleep, and so in another minute was Dorothy, her head pillowed
against his kind, comfortable, cowardly heart. Fast asleep at the
gates of a strange gray city!



CHAPTER 5

SIR HOKUS OF POKES

It was long past sunup before Dorothy awoke. She rubbed her eyes,
yawned once or twice, and then shook the Cowardly Lion. The gates of
the city were open, and although it looked even grayer in the daytime
than it looked at night, the travelers were too hungry to be
particular. A large placard was posted just inside:

      THIS IS POKES!
      DON'T RUN!
      DON'T SING!
      TALK SLOWLY!
      DON'T WHISTLE!
              _Order of the Chief Poker._

read Dorothy. "How cheerful! Hah, hoh, hum-mm!"

"Don't!" begged the Cowardly Lion with tears in his eyes. "If I yawn
again, I'll swallow my tail, and if I don't have something to eat
soon, I'll do it anyway. Let's hurry! There's something queer about
this place, Dorothy! Ah, hah, hoh, hum-mm!"

Stifling their yawns, the two started down the long, narrow street.
The houses were of gray stone, tall and stiff with tiny barred
windows. It was absolutely quiet, and not a person was in sight. But
when they turned the corner, they saw a crowd of queer-looking people
creeping toward them. These singular individuals stopped between each
step and stood perfectly still, and Dorothy was so surprised at their
unusual appearance that she laughed right in the middle of a yawn.

In the first place, they never lifted their feet, but pushed them
along like skates. The women were dressed in gray polka-dot dresses
with huge poke bonnets that almost hid their fat, sleepy,
wide-mouthed faces. Most of them had pet snails on strings, and so
slowly did they move that it looked as though the snails were tugging
them along.

The men were dressed like a party of congressmen, but instead of high
hats wore large red nightcaps, and they were all as solemn as owls.
It seemed impossible for them to keep both eyes open at the same
time, and at first Dorothy thought they were winking at her. But as
the whole company continued to stare fixedly with one open eye, she
burst out laughing. At the unexpected sound (for no one had ever
laughed in Pokes before), the women picked up their snails in a great
fright, and the men clapped their fingers to their ears or to the
places where their ears were under the red nightcaps.

"These must be the Slow Pokes," giggled Dorothy, nudging the Cowardly
Lion. "Let's go to meet them, for they'll never reach us at the rate
they are coming!"

"There's something wrong with my feet," rumbled the Cowardly Lion
without looking up. "Hah, hoh, hum! What's the use of hurrying?" The
fact of the matter was that they couldn't hurry if they tried.
Indeed, they could hardly lift their feet at all.

"I wish the Scarecrow were with us," sighed the Cowardly Lion,
shuffling along unhappily. "He never grows sleepy, and he always
knows what to do."

"No use wishing," yawned Dorothy. "I only hope he's not as lost as we
are."

By struggling hard, they just managed to keep moving, and by the time
they came up with the Slow Pokes, they were completely worn out. A
cross-looking Poke held up his arm threateningly, and Dorothy and the
Cowardly Lion stopped.

"You--" said the Poke; then closed his mouth and stood staring
vacantly for a whole minute.

"Are--" He brought out the word with a perfectly enormous yawn, and
Dorothy began fanning the Cowardly Lion with her hat, for he showed
signs of falling asleep again.

"What?" she asked crossly.

"Under--" sighed the Poke after a long pause, and Dorothy, seeing
that there was no hurrying him, began counting to herself. Just as
she reached sixty, the Poke pushed back his red nightcap and shouted:

"Arrest!"

"Arrest!" shouted all the other Pokes so loud that the Cowardly Lion
roused himself with a start, and the pet snails stuck out their
heads. "A rest? A rest is not what we want! We want breakfast!"
growled the lion irritably and started to roar, but a yawn spoiled
it. (One simply cannot look fierce by yawning.)

"You--" began the Poke. But Dorothy could not stand hearing the same
slow speech again. Putting her fingers in her ears, she shouted back:

"What for?"

The Pokes regarded her sternly. Some even opened both eyes. Then the
one who had first addressed them, covering a terrific gape with one
hand, pointed with the other to a sign on a large post at the corner
of the street.

        "Speed limit 1/4 mile an hour" said the sign.

"We're arrested for speeding!" shouted Dorothy in the Cowardly Lion's
ear.

"Did you say feeding?" asked the poor lion, waking up with a start.
"If I go to sleep again before I'm fed, I'll starve to death!"

"Then keep awake," yawned Dorothy. By this time, the Pokes had
surrounded them and were waving them imperiously ahead. They looked
so threatening that Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion began to creep in
the direction of a gloomy, gray castle. Of the journey neither of
them remembered a thing, for with the gaping and yawning Pokes it was
almost impossible to keep awake. But they must have walked in their
sleep, for the next thing Dorothy knew, a harsh voice called slowly:

"Poke--him!"

Greatly alarmed, Dorothy opened her eyes. They were in a huge stone
hall hung all over with rusty armor, and seated on a great stone
chair, snoring so loudly that all the steel helmets rattled, was a
Knight. The tallest and crossest of the Pokes rushed at him with a
long poker, giving him such a shove that he sprawled to the floor.

"So--" yawned the Cowardly Lion, awakened by the clatter, "Knight has
fallen!"

"Prisoners--Sir Hokus!" shouted the Chief Poker, lifting the Knight's
plume and speaking into the helmet as if he were telephoning.

The Knight arose with great dignity, and after straightening his
armor, let down his visor, and Dorothy saw a kind, timid face with
melancholy blue eyes--not at all Pokish, as she explained to Ozma
later.

"What means this unwonted clamor?" asked Sir Hokus, peering curiously
at the prisoners.

"We're sorry to waken you," said Dorothy politely, "but could you
please give us some breakfast?"

"A lot!" added the Cowardly Lion, licking his chops.

"It's safer for me to sing," said the Knight mournfully, and throwing
back his head, he roared in a high, hoarse voice:

      "Don't yawn! Don't yawn!
      We're out of breath--
      Begone--BEGONE
      Or die the death!"

The Cowardly Lion growled threateningly and began lashing his tail.

"If he weren't in a can, I'd eat him," he rumbled, "but I never could
abide tinned meat."

"He's not in a can, he's in armor," explained Dorothy, too interested
to pay much attention to the Cowardly Lion, for at the first note of
the Knight's song, the Pokes began scowling horribly, and by the time
he had finished they were backing out of the room faster than Dorothy
ever imagined they could go.

"So that's why the sign said don't sing," thought Dorothy to herself.
The air seemed clearer somehow, and she no longer felt sleepy.

When the last Poke had disappeared, the Knight sighed and climbed
gravely back on his stone chair.

"My singing makes them very wroth. In faith, they cannot endure
music; it wakens them," explained Sir Hokus. "But hold, 'twas food
you asked of me. Breakfast, I believe you called it." With an uneasy
glance at the Cowardly Lion, who was sniffing the air hungrily, the
Knight banged on his steel armor with his sword, and a fat, lazy Poke
shuffled slowly into the hall.

"Pid, bring the stew," roared Sir Hokus as the Poke stood blinking at
them dully.

"Stew, Pid!" he repeated loudly, and began to hum under his breath,
at which Pid fairly ran out of the room, returning in a few minutes
with a large yellow bowl. This he handed ungraciously to Dorothy.
Then he brought a great copper tub of the stuff for the Cowardly Lion
and retired sulkily.

Dorothy thought she had never tasted anything more delicious. The
Cowardly Lion was gulping down his share with closed eyes, and both,
I am very sorry to say, forgot even to thank Sir Hokus.

"Are you perchance a damsel in distress?"

Quite startled, Dorothy looked up from her bowl and saw the Knight
regarding her wistfully.

"She's in Pokes, and that's the same thing," said the Cowardly Lion
without opening his eyes.

"We're lost," began the little girl, "but--"

There was something so quaint and gentle about the Knight, that she
soon found herself talking to him like an old friend. She told him
all of their adventures since leaving the Emerald City and even told
about the disappearance of the Scarecrow.

"Passing strange, yet how refreshing," murmured Sir Hokus. "And if I
seem a little behind times, you must not blame me. For centuries, I
have dozed in this gray castle, and it cometh over me that things
have greatly changed. This beast now, he talks quite manfully, and
this Kingdom that you mention, this Oz? Never heard of it!"

"Never heard of Oz?" gasped the little girl. "Why, you're a subject
of Oz, and Pokes is in Oz, though I don't know just where."

Here Dorothy gave him a short history of the Fairy country, and of
the many adventures she had had since she had come there. Sir Hokus
listened with growing melancholy.

"To think," he sighed mournfully, "that I was prisoner here while all
that was happening!"

"Are _you_ a prisoner?" asked Dorothy in surprise. "I thought you were
King of the Pokes!"

"Uds daggers!" thundered Sir Hokus so suddenly that Dorothy jumped.
"I am a _knight!"_

Seeing her startled expression, he controlled himself. "I was a
knight," he continued brokenly. "Long centuries ago, mounted on my
goodly steed, I fared from my father's castle to offer my sword to a
mighty king. His name?" Sir Hokus tapped his forehead uncertainly.
"Go to, I have forgot."

"Could it have been King Arthur?" exclaimed Dorothy, wide-eyed with
interest. "Why, just think of your being still alive!"

"That's just the point," choked the Knight. "I've been alive--still,
so still that I've forgotten everything. Why, I can't even remember
how I used to talk," he confessed miserably.

"But how did you get here?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion, who did not
like being left out of the conversation.

"I had barely left my father's castle before I met a stranger," said
Sir Hokus, sitting up very straight, "who challenged me to battle. I
spurred my horse forward, our lances met, and the stranger was
unseated. But by my faith, 'twas no mortal Knight." Sir Hokus sighed
deeply and lapsed into silence.

"What happened?" asked Dorothy curiously, for Sir Hokus seemed to
have forgotten them.

"The Knight," said he with another mighty sigh, "struck the ground
with his lance and cried, 'Live Wretch, for centuries in the
stupidest country out of the world,' and disappeared. And here--here
I am!" With a despairing gesture, Sir Hokus arose, big tears
splashing down his armor.

"I feel that I am brave, very brave, but how am I to know until I
have encountered danger? Ah, friends, behold in me a Knight who has
never had a real adventure, never killed a dragon, nor championed a
Lady, nor gone on a Quest!"

Dropping on his knees before the little girl, Sir Hokus took her
hand. "Let me go with you on this Quest for the valiant Scarecrow.
Let me be your good Night!" he begged eagerly.

"Good night," coughed the Cowardly Lion, who, to tell the truth, was
feeling a bit jealous. But Dorothy was thrilled, and as Sir Hokus
continued to look at her pleadingly, she took off her hair ribbon and
bound it 'round his arm.

"You shall be my own true Knight, and I your Lady Fair!" she
announced solemnly, and exactly as she had read in books.

At this interesting juncture the Cowardly Lion gave a tremendous
yawn, and Sir Hokus with an exclamation of alarm jumped to his feet.
The Pokes had returned to the hall, and Dorothy felt herself falling
asleep again.

      Up, up, my lieges and away!
      We take the field again--
      For Ladies fair we fight today
      And KING! Up, up, my merry men!

shrilled the Knight as if he were leading an army to battle. The
Pokes opened both eyes, but did not immediately retire. Sir Hokus
bravely swallowed a yawn and hastily clearing his throat shouted
another song, which he evidently made up on the spur of the moment:

      Avaunt! Be off! Be gone--Methinks
      We'll be asleep in forty winks!

This time the Pokes left sullenly, but the effect of their presence
had thrown Dorothy, the Cowardly Lion, and the Knight into a violent
fit of the gapes.

"If I fall asleep, nothing can save you," said Sir Hokus in an
agitated voice. "Hah, hoh, hum! Hah--!"

The Knight's eyes closed.

"Don't do it, don't do it!" begged Dorothy, shaking him violently.
"Can't we run away?"

"I've been trying for five centuries," wailed the Knight in a
discouraged voice, "but I always fall asleep before I reach the gate,
and they bring me back here. They're rather fond of me in their slow
way," he added apologetically.

"Couldn't you keep singing?" asked the Cowardly Lion anxiously, for
the prospect of a five-century stay in Pokes was more than he could
bear.

"Couldn't we _all_ sing?" suggested Dorothy. "Surely all three of us
won't fall asleep at once."

"I'm not much of a singer," groaned the Cowardly Lion, beginning to
tremble, "but I'm willing to do my share!"

"I like you," said Sir Hokus, going over and thumping the Cowardly
Lion approvingly on the back. "You ought to be knighted!"

The lion blinked his eyes, for Sir Hokus' iron fist bruised him
severely, but knowing it was kindly meant, he bore it bravely.

"I am henceforth a beknighted lion," he whispered to Dorothy while
Sir Hokus was straightening his armor. Next the Knight took down an
iron poker, which he handed to Dorothy.

"To wake us up with," he explained. "And now, Lady Dorothy, if you
are ready, we will start on the Quest for the honorable Scarecrow,
and remember, everybody sing--_Sing for your life!"_



CHAPTER 6

SINGING THEIR WAY OUT OF POKES

Taking a deep breath, Sir Hokus, the Cowardly Lion and Dorothy burst
out of the hall singing at the top of their voices.

"Three blind mice--!" sang Dorothy.

"Across the plain!" shouted Sir Hokus.

"I am the Cowardly Lion of Oz!" roared the lion.

The Pokes were so taken aback at the horrid sounds that they ran
scurrying right and left. In another minute the three were out of the
castle and singing their way through the gloomy garden. Dorothy stuck
to the Three Blind Mice. Sir Hokus sang verse after verse of an old
English ballad, and the Cowardly Lion roared and gurgled a song of
his own making, which, considering it was a first attempt, was not so
bad:

      I am the Cowardly Lion of Oz!
      Be good! Begone! Beware! Becoz
      When I am scared full fierce I be;
      Br--rah--grr--ruff, look out for me!

The Pokes stumbled this way and that, and all went well until they
rushed into a company of Pokes who were playing croquet. The slowness
with which they raised their mallets fascinated Dorothy, and she
stopped to watch them in spite of herself.

"Don't stop! Sing!" growled the Cowardly Lion in the middle of a
line. To make up for lost time, Dorothy closed her eyes and sang
harder than ever, but alas! next instant she fell over a wicket,
which so deprived her of breath that she could barely scramble up,
let alone sing. As soon as she stopped singing, the Pokes paused in
their flight, and as soon as they paused Dorothy began to gape.
Singing for dear life, Sir Hokus jerked Dorothy by the arm, and the
Cowardly Lion roared so loud that the Pokes covered their ears and
began backing away.

"There was a Knight! Come on, come on!" sang Sir Hokus, and Dorothy
came, and in a few minutes was able to take up the "Three Blind Mice"
again. But running and singing at the same time is not an easy task.
And running through Pokes is like trying to run through water. (You
know how hard that is?)

"Three Blind Mice--uh--hah--Three Blind--Mice--uh-hah--I can't sing
another note! Thu--ree--!" gasped poor Dorothy, stumbling along,
while the Cowardly Lion was puffing like an engine. The Pokes in the
garden had recovered from their first alarm and were following at a
safe distance. The gates of the city were only a short distance off,
but it seemed to Dorothy that she could not go another step.

A large group of Pokes had gathered at the gates, and unless they
could sing their way through, they would fall asleep and be carried
ignominiously back to the castle.

"Now!" wheezed Sir Hokus, "Remember, it is for the Scarecrow!" All of
them swallowed, took a deep breath, and put their last remaining
strength into their voices. But a wily Poke who had stuffed some
cotton in his ears now approached pushing a little cart.

"Take--!" he drawled, and before Dorothy realized what she was doing,
she had accepted a cone from the Poke.

"Hah, hoh, hum! Why, it's hokey pokey!" spluttered Dorothy, and with
a deep sigh of delight she took a large bite of the pink ice cream.
How cool it felt on her dry throat! She opened her mouth for a second
taste, yawned terrifically, and fell with a thud to the stone
pavement.

"Dorothy!" wailed Sir Hokus, stopping short in his song and bending
over the little girl. The poor Cowardly Lion gave a gulp of despair
and began running around the two, roaring and singing in a choked
voice. The Pokes nodded to each other in a pleased fashion, and the
Chief Poker started cautiously toward them with a long, thick rope.
The Cowardly Lion redoubled his efforts. Then, seeing Sir Hokus about
to fall, he jumped on the Knight with all his strength. Down crashed
Sir Hokus, his armor clanging against the stones that paved the
gateway.

"Sing!" roared the Cowardly Lion, glaring at him fiercely. The fall
wakened the poor Knight, but he had not the strength to rise. Sitting
on the hard stones and looking reproachfully at the Cowardly Lion, he
began his ballad in a half-hearted fashion. The Cowardly Lion's heart
was like to burst between lack of breath and fear, but making one
last tremendous effort and still roaring his song, he bounded at the
Chief Poker, seized the rope, and was back before the stupid creature
had time to yawn.

"Tie it around your waist; take Dorothy in your arms!" gasped the
Cowardly Lion out of the corner of his mouth. Sir Hokus, though
completely dazed, had just enough presence of mind to obey, and the
next minute the Cowardly Lion, growling between his teeth like a good
fellow, was dashing through the group of Pokes, the other end of the
rope in his mouth.

Bumpety bump--bump--bump! Bangety-bang-bang! went Sir Hokus over the
cobbles, holding his helmet with one hand and Dorothy fast in the
other arm. The Pokes fell this way and that, and such was the
determination of the Cowardly Lion that he never stopped till he was
out of the gate and halfway up the rough road they had so recently
traveled. Then with a mighty sigh, he dropped the rope, rolled over
and over down the hill, and lay panting with exhaustion at the
bottom.

The bumping over the cobbles had wakened Sir Hokus thoroughly.
Indeed, the poor Knight was black and blue, and his armor dented and
scraped frightfully in important places.

Dorothy, considerably shaken, opened her eyes and began feebly
singing "Three Blind Mice."

"No need," puffed Sir Hokus, lifting her off his lap and rising
stiffly.

"Yon noble beast has rescued us."

"Won't the Pokes come up here?" asked Dorothy, staring around a bit
dizzily.

"They cannot live out of the kingdom," said the Knight, and Dorothy
drew a big sigh of relief. Sir Hokus, however, was looking very
grave.

"I have failed on my first adventure. Had it not been for the
Cowardly Lion, we would now be prisoners in Pokes," he murmured
sadly. Then he unfastened the plume from his helmet. "It beseemeth me
not to wear it," sighed the Knight mournfully, and though Dorothy
tried her best to comfort him, he refused to put it back. Finally,
she fastened the plume to her dress, and they went down to the
Cowardly Lion.

There was a little spring nearby, and after they had poured six
helmets of water over his head, the lion opened his eyes. "Been in a
good many fights," gasped the lion, "but I never fought one like
this. Singing, bah!"

"Noble Sir, how can I ever repay you?" faltered the Knight. "Alas,
that I have failed in the hour of trial!"

"Why, it wasn't a question of courage at all," rumbled the Cowardly
Lion, greatly embarrassed. "I had the loudest voice and the most
breath, that's all! You got the rough end of it." Sir Hokus looked
ruefully at his armor. The back was entirely squashed.


"Never mind!" said the Knight bravely. "It is the front one presents
to the foe."

"Now you're talking like a real Knight," said Dorothy. "A while ago
you said, 'Yon' and 'beseemeth,' and first thing you know the talk
will all come back to you." Sir Hokus' honest face shone with
pleasure.

"Odds bludgeons and truncheons! The little maid is right!" he
exclaimed, striking an attitude. "And once it does, the rest will be
easy."

"Don't say rest to me," begged the Cowardly Lion, getting slowly to
his feet. "Hah, hoh, hum! Just to think of it makes me yawn. Now
don't you think we had better start off?"

"If you're rested," began Dorothy. The Cowardly Lion put his paw over
his ear and looked so comical that both Dorothy and Sir Hokus laughed
heartily.

"If you're ready," amended Dorothy, and the three adventurers started
up the steep road. "The first thing to do," said the little girl, "is
to get back to the Emerald City as quickly as we can."

At this very minute Glinda, the Good Sorceress of Oz, in her palace
in the Quadling Country, was puzzling over an entry in the Magic
Record Book. This book tells everything that is happening in the
world and out, and while it does not give details, it is a very
useful possession.

"The Emperor of the Silver Islands," read Glinda, "has returned to
his people."

"Now who is the Emperor of the Silver Islands?" she asked herself.
She puzzled about it for a long while, and then, deciding that it had
nothing to do with the Fairy Kingdom of Oz, she closed the book and
went for a walk in the palace garden.

Dorothy and Sir Hokus and the Cowardly Lion had meanwhile reached the
first sign in the dim forest, the sign directing travelers to Pokes.
Two roads branched out through the forest, and after much debating
they took the wider.

"Do you 'spose this leads to the Emerald City?" asked Cowardly Lion
dubiously.

"Time will tell, time will tell," said Sir Hokus cheerfully.

"Yes," murmured the Cowardly Lion, "time will tell. But what?"



CHAPTER 7

THE SCARECROW IS HAILED AS EMPEROR!

Leaning forward on the great throne, the Scarecrow waited impatiently
for the ancient gentleman to speak. The gray-skinned courtiers were
eyeing him expectantly, and just as the suspense became almost
unendurable, the old man threw up his arms and cried sharply:

"The prophecy of the magic beanstalk has been fulfilled. In this
radiant and sublime Scarecrowcus, the spirit of Chang Wang Woe, the
mighty, has returned. And I, the Grand Chew Chew of the realm,
prostrate myself before this wonderful Scarecrowcus, Emperor of the
Silver Islands." So, likewise, did all the company present, and the
Scarecrow, taken unawares, flew up several feet and landed in a heap
on the steps leading to the throne. He climbed back hurriedly,
picking up the fan and parasol that he had plucked from the
beanstalk.

"I wish Professor Wogglebug could hear this," said the Scarecrow,
settling himself complacently. "But I must watch out, and remember to
hold on."

The Grand Chew Chew was the first to rise, and folding his arms, he
asked solemnly:

"What are your commands, Ancient and Honorable Scarecrowcus?"

"If you'd just omit the Cus," begged the Scarecrow in an embarrassed
voice, "I believe I could think better. Am I in China, or where? Are
you Chinamen, or what?"

"We are Silvermen," said the Grand Chew Chew impressively, "and a
much older race than our Chinese cousins. They are people of the sun.
We are people of the stars. Has your Highness so soon forgotten?"

"I am afraid," said the Scarecrow, rubbing his chin reflectively,
"that I have." He gazed slowly around the great throne room. Ozma's
palace itself was not more dazzling. The floor of dull silver blocks
was covered with rich blue rugs. Furniture, chairs, screens and
everything were made of silver inlaid with precious stones. Filigreed
silver lanterns hung from the high ceilings, and tall silver vases
filled with pink and blue blossoms filled the rooms with their
perfume. Blue flags embroidered with silver stars fluttered from the
walls and the tips of the pikebearers' spears, and silver seemed to
be so plentiful that even shoes were fashioned of it. Faintly through
the windows came the sweet tones of a hundred silver chimes, and
altogether the Scarecrow was quite dazed by his apparent good
fortune. Surely they had called him Emperor, but how could that be?
He turned to address the Grand Chew Chew; then as he saw out of the
corner of his eye that the assemblage were making ready to fall upon
their faces, he exclaimed in a hoarse whisper:

"May I speak to you alone?" The Grand Chew Chew waved his hand
imperiously, and the courtiers with a great crackling of silver
brocade backed from the hall.

"Very kind of them to bow, but I wish they wouldn't," sighed the
Scarecrow, sinking back on the great throne. "It blows one about so.
I declare, if another person falls at my feet, I'll have nervous
prostration."

Again he took a long survey of the hall, then turned to the Grand
Chew Chew. "Would you mind," he asked simply, "telling me again who I
am and how?"

"Who and how? Who--You are, illustrious Sir, the Emperor Chang Wang
Woe, or to be more exact, his spirit!"

"I have always been a spirited person," observed the Scarecrow
dubiously, "but never a spirit without a person. I must insist on
being a person."

"How?" the Grand Chew Chew proceeded without noticing the Scarecrow's
remarks. "Fifty years ago--after your Extreme Highness had defeated
in battle the King of the Golden Islands--a magician entered the
realm. This magician, in the employ of this wicked king, entered a
room in the palace where your Highness lay sleeping and by an act of
necromancy changed you to a crocus!"

"Ouch!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, shuddering involuntarily.

"And had it not been for the Empress, your faithful wife, you would
have been lost forever to the Empire."

"Wife?" gasped the Scarecrow faintly. "Have I a wife?"

"If your Highness will permit me to finish," begged the Grand Chew
Chew with great dignity. The Scarecrow nodded. "Your wife, Tsing
Tsing, the beautiful, took the crocus, which was fading rapidly, and
planted it in a silver bowl in the center of this very hall and for
three days kept it fresh with her tears. Waking on the third morning,
the Empress was amazed to see in place of the crocus a giant bean
pole that extended to the roof of the palace and disappeared among
the clouds."

"Ah!" murmured the Scarecrow, looking up, "My family tree!"

"Beside the bean pole lay a crumpled parchment." The Grand Chew Chew
felt in the sleeve of his kimono and brought out a bit of crumpled
silver paper, and adjusting his horn spectacles, read slowly.

"Into the first being who touches this magic pole--on the other side
of the world--the spirit of Emperor Chang Wang Woe will enter. And
fifty years from this day, he will return--to save his people."

The Grand Chew Chew took off his specs and folded up the paper. "The
day has come! You have come down the bean pole, and are undoubtedly
that being who has gone from Emperor to crocus to Scarecrowcus. I
have ruled the Islands these fifty years; have seen to the education
of your sons and grandsons. And now, gracious and exalted Master, as
I am an old man I ask you to relieve me from the cares of state."

"Sons! Grandsons!" choked the Scarecrow, beginning to feel very much
alarmed indeed. "How old am I?"

"Your Highness," said the Grand Chew Chew with a deep salaam, "is as
old as I. In other words, you are in the ripe and glorious
eighty-fifth year of your Majesty's illustrious and useful age."

"Eighty five!" gasped the Scarecrow, staring in dismay at the gray,
wrinkled face of the old Silverman. "Now see here, Chew Chew, are you
sure of that?"

"Quite sure, Immortal and Honored Master!"

The Scarecrow could not help but be convinced of the truth of the
Grand Chew Chew's story. The pole in the Munchkin farmer's cornfield
was none other than the magic beanstalk, and he, thrust on the pole
by the farmer to scare away the crows, had received the spirit of the
Emperor Chang Wang Woe. "Which accounts for my cleverness," he
thought gloomily. Now, surely he should have been pleased, for he had
come in search of a family, but the acquisition of an empire, sons
and grandsons, and old age, all in a trice, fairly took his breath
away.

"Does the prophecy say anything about restoring my imperial person?"
he asked anxiously, for the thought of looking like Chew Chew was not
a cheerful one.

"Alas, no!" sighed the Grand Chew Chew sorrowfully. "But we have very
clever wizards on the Island, and I shall set them at work on the
problem at once."

"Now don't be in such a rush," begged the Scarecrow, secretly
determined to lock up the wizards at the first opportunity. "I'm
rather fond of this shape. You see, it requires no food and never
grows tired--or old!"

"The royal robes will in a measure conceal it," murmured the Grand
Chew Chew politely, and clapped his hands. A little servitor bounced
into the hall.

"A royal robe, Quick Silver, for his Radiant Highness," snapped the
Grand Chew Chew. In a moment Quick Silver had returned with a
magnificent purple satin robe embroidered in silver threads and heavy
with jewels, and a hat of silver cloth with upturned brim. The
Scarecrow wrapped himself in the purple robe, took off his old
Munchkin hat, and substituted the Imperial headpiece.

"How do I look, Chew?" he asked anxiously.

"Quite like your old Imperial Self, except--" The old Prime Minister
ran unsteadily out of the room. There was a muffled scream from the
hall, and the next instant he returned with a long, shiny, silver
queue which he had evidently clipped from the head of one of the
servants. Removing the Scarecrow's hat, he pinned the queue to the
back, set it on the Scarecrow's head, and stood regarding him with
great satisfaction. "Ah, if the Empress could only see you!" he
murmured rapturously.

"Where--where is she?" asked the Scarecrow, looking around nervously.
His long, care-free life in Oz had somewhat unfitted him, he
reflected, for family life.

"Alas!" sighed the Grand Chew Chew, wiping his eyes on the sleeve of
his kimono, "She has returned to her silver ancestors."

"Then show me her picture," commanded the Scarecrow, visibly
affected. The Grand Chew Chew stepped to a side wall, and pulling on
a silken cord, disclosed the picture of a large, gray lady with
curiously small eyes and a curiously large nose.

"Is she not beautiful?" asked the Grand Chew Chew, bowing his head.

"Beautiful--er--er, beautiful!" gulped the Scarecrow. He thought of
lovely little Ozma and dear little Dorothy, and all at once felt
terribly upset and homesick. He had no recollection of the Silver
Island or his life here whatever. Who was he, anyway--the Scarecrow
of Oz or Emperor Chang Wang Woe? He couldn't be both.

"Ah!" whispered the Grand Chew Chew, seeing his agitation. "You
remember her?" The Scarecrow shook his head, with an inward shudder.

"Now show me myself, Chew," he asked curiously. Pulling the cord of a
portrait beside the Empress, Chew Chew revealed the picture of Chang
Wang Woe as he had been fifty years ago. His face was bland and
jolly, and to be perfectly truthful, quite like the Scarecrow's in
shape and expression. "I am beside myself," murmured the Scarecrow
dazedly--which in truth he was.

"You were--er--are a very royal and handsome person," stammered the
Grand Chew Chew.

The Scarecrow, stepping off the throne to examine himself more
closely, dropped the little fan and parasol. He had really not had
time to examine them since they snapped off the beanstalk, and now,
looking at them carefully, he found them extremely pretty.

"Dorothy will like these," thought the Scarecrow, slipping them into
a large inside pocket of his robe. Already, in the back of his head,
was a queer notion that he would at some time or other return to Oz.
He started to give the Grand Chew Chew a spirited description of that
wonderful country, but the ancient gentleman yawned and, waving his
hands toward the door, interrupted him with:

"Would not your Supreme Highness care to inspect your present
dominions?"

"I suppose I may as well!" With a deep sigh, the Scarecrow took the
Grand Chew Chew's arm and, holding up his royal kimono (which was
rather long) with the other hand, walked unsteadily down the great
salon. They were about to pass into the garden when a little fat
Silverman slid around the door, a huge silver drumstick upraised in
his right hand and a great drum hung about his neck.

The drummer beamed on the Scarecrow.

      Chang Wang Woe, the Beautiful,
      The Beautiful has come!
      Sublime and silver Scarecrow,
      Let sound the royal drum!

chanted the little man in a high, thin voice, and started to bring
the drumstick down upon the huge head of his noisy instrument.

"No you don't!" cried the Scarecrow, leaping forward and catching his
arm.

"I positively forbid it!"

"Then I shall have no work!" screamed the drummer, falling on his
face. "Ah, Gracious Master, don't you remember me?"

"Yes," said the Scarecrow kindly, "who are you?"

"Oh, don't you remember little Happy Toko?" wheezed the little man,
the tears rolling down his cheeks. "I was only a boy, but you used to
be fond of me."

"Why, of course, my dear Tappy," said the Scarecrow, not liking to
hurt the little fellow's feelings. "But why do you beat the drum?"

"It is customary to sound the drum at the approach of your Royal
Highness," put in the Grand Chew Chew importantly.

"Was customary," said the Scarecrow firmly. "My dear Tappy Oko, never
sound it in my presence again; it is too upsetting." Which was true
enough, for one blow of the drum sent the flimsy Scarecrow flying
into the air.

"You're dismissed, Happy," snapped the Grand Chew Chew. At this, the
little Silver Islander began weeping and roaring with distress.

"Stop! What else can you do besides beat a drum?" asked the Scarecrow
kindly.

"I can sing, stand on my head, and tell jokes," sniffed Happy Toko,
shuffling from one foot to the other.

"Very good," said the Scarecrow. "You are henceforth Imperial Punster
to my Person. Come along, we're going to look over the Island."

The Grand Chew Chew frowned so terribly that Happy Toko's knees shook
with terror.

"It is not fitting for a slave to accompany the Grand Chew Chew and
the Emperor," he hissed angrily.

The Scarecrow looked surprised, for the Kingdom of Oz is quite
democratic, and no one is considered better than another. But seeing
this was not the time to argue, he winked broadly behind the Grand
Chew Chew's back.

"I'll see you again, Tappy my boy," he called genially, and passed
out into the garden, where a magnificent silver palanquin, surrounded
by pikemen and shieldbearers, awaited him.



CHAPTER 8

THE SCARECROW STUDIES THE SILVER ISLAND

Two days had passed since the Scarecrow had fallen into his Kingdom.
He was not finding his royal duties as pleasant as he had
anticipated. The country was beautiful enough, but being Emperor of
the Silver Islands was not the simple affair that ruling Oz had been.
The pigtail on the back of his hat was terribly distracting, and he
was always tripping over his kimono, to which he could not seem to
accustom himself. His subjects were extremely quarrelsome, always
pulling one another's queues or stealing fruit, umbrellas, and silver
polish. His ministers, the Grand Chew Chew, the Chief Chow Chow, and
General Mugwump, were no better, and keeping peace in the palace took
all the Scarecrow's cleverness.

In the daytime he tried culprits in the royal court, interviewed his
seventeen secretaries, rode out in the royal palanquin, and made
speeches to visiting princes. At night he sat in the great silver
salon and by the light of the lanterns studied the Book of
Ceremonies. His etiquette, the Grand Chew Chew informed him, was
shocking. He was always doing something wrong, dodging the Imperial
Umbrella, speaking kindly to a palace servant, or walking unattended
in the gardens.

The royal palace itself was richly furnished, and the Scarecrow had
more than five hundred robes of state. The gardens, with their
sparkling waterfalls, glowing orange trees, silver temples, towers
and bridges, were too lovely for words. Poppies, roses, lotus and
other lilies perfumed the air, and at night a thousand silver
lanterns turned them to a veritable fairyland.

The grass and trees were green as in other lands, but the sky as
always full of tiny silver clouds, the waters surrounding the island
were of a lovely liquid silver, and as all the houses and towers were
of this gleaming metal, the effect was bewildering and beautiful.

But the Silver Islanders themselves were too stupid to appreciate
this beauty. "And what use is it all when I have no one to enjoy it
with me," sighed the Scarecrow. "And no time to _play!"_

In Oz no one thought it queer if Ozma, the little Queen, jumped rope
with Dorothy or Betsy Bobbin, or had a quiet game of croquet with the
palace cook. But here, alas, everything was different. If the
Scarecrow so much as ventured a game of ball with the gardener's boy,
the whole court was thrown into an uproar. At first, the Scarecrow
tried to please everybody, but finding that nothing pleased the
people in the palace, he decided to please himself.

"I don't care a kinkajou if I am the Emperor, I'm going to talk to
whom I please!" he exclaimed on the second night, and shaking his
glove at a bronze statue, he threw the Book of Ceremonies into the
fountain. The next morning, therefore, he ascended the throne with
great firmness. Immediately, the courtiers prostrated themselves, and
the Scarecrow's arms and legs blew about wildly.

"Stand up at once," puffed the Scarecrow when he had regained his
balance.

"You are giving me nervous prostration. Chew, kindly issue an edict
forbidding prostrations. Anyone caught bowing in my presence again
shall lose--" the courtiers looked alarmed "--his pigtail!" finished
the Scarecrow.

"And now, Chew, you will take my place, please. I am going for a walk
with Tappy Oko."

The Grand Chew Chew's mouth fell open with surprise, but seeing the
Scarecrow's determined expression, he dared not disobey, and he
immediately began making strange marks on a long, red parchment.
Happy Toko trembled as the Scarecrow Emperor took his arm, and the
courtiers stared at one another in dismay as the two walked quietly
out into the garden.

Nothing happened, however, and Tappy, regaining his composure, took
out a little silver flute and started a lively tune.

"I had to take matters into my own hands, Tappy," said the Scarecrow,
listening to the music with a pleased expression. "Are there any
words to that song?"

"Yes, illustrious and Supreme Sir!"

      Two spoons went down a Por-ce-Lane,
      To meet a China saucer,
      A 'talking China in a way
      To break a white man's jaw, Sir!

sang Happy, and finished by standing gravely on his head.

"Your Majesty used to be very fond of this song," spluttered Happy.
(It is difficult to speak while upside down, and if you don't think
so, try it!)

"Ah!" said the Scarecrow, beginning to feel more cheerful, "Tell me
something about myself and my family, Tappy Oko."

"Happy Toko, if it pleases your Supreme Amiability," corrected the
little silver man, somersaulting to a standstill beside the
Scarecrow.

"It does and it doesn't," murmured the Scarecrow. "There is something
about you that reminds me of a pudding, and you tapped the drum,
didn't you? I believe I shall call you Tappy Oko, if you don't mind!"

The Scarecrow seated himself on a silver bench and motioned for the
Imperial Punster to sit down beside him. Tappy Oko sat down
fearfully, first making sure that he was not observed.

"Saving your Imperial Presence, this is not permitted," said Tappy
uneasily.

"Never mind about my Imperial Presence," chuckled the Scarecrow.
"Tell me about my Imperial Past."

"Ah!" said Tappy Oko, rolling up his eyes, "You were one of the most
magnificent and magnanimous of monarchs."

"Was I?" asked the Scarecrow in a pleased voice.

"You distributed rice among the poor, and advice among the rich, and
fought many glorious battles," continued the little man. "I composed
a little song about you. Perhaps you would like to hear it?"

The Scarecrow nodded, and Tappy, throwing back his head, chanted with
a will:

      Chang Wang Woe did draw the bow--
      And twist the queues of a thousand foe!

"In Oz," murmured the Scarecrow reflectively as Tappy finished, "I
twisted the necks of a flock of wild crows--that was before I had my
excellent brains, too. Oh, I'm a fighting man, there's no doubt about
it. But tell me, Tappy, where did I meet my wife?"

"In the water!" chuckled Tappy Oko, screwing up his eyes.

"Never!" The Scarecrow looked out over the harbor and then down at
his lumpy figure.

"Your Majesty forgets you were then a man like me--er--not stuffed
with straw, I mean," exclaimed Happy, looking embarrassed. "She was
fishing," continued the little Punster, "when a huge silver fish
became entangled in her line. She stood up, the fish gave a mighty
leap and pulled her out of the boat. Your Majesty, having seen the
whole affair from the bank, plunged bravely into the water and,
swimming out, rescued her, freed the fish, and in due time made her
your bride. I've made a song about that, also."

"Let's hear it," said the Scarecrow. And this is what Happy sung:

      Tsing Tsing, a Silver Fisher's daughter,
      Was fishing in the silver water.
      The moon shone on her silver hair
      And there were fishes everywhere!

      Then came a mighty silver fish,
      It seized her line and with a swish
      Of silver fins upset her boat.
      Tsing Tsing could neither swim nor float.

      She raised her silver voice in fear
      And who her call of help should hear
      But Chang Wang Woe, the Emperor,
      Who saved and married her, what's more!

"Did I really?" asked the Scarecrow, feeling quite flattered by
Happy's song.

"Yes," said Happy positively, "and invited me to the wedding, though
I was only a small boy."

"Was Chew Chew there?" The Scarecrow couldn't help wondering how the
old Nobleman had taken his marriage with a poor fisherman's daughter.

Happy chuckled at the memory. "He had a Princess all picked out for
you," he confided merrily:

      And there he stood in awful pride
      And scorned the father of the bride!

"Hoh!" roared the Scarecrow, falling off the bench. "That's the
Ozziest thing I've heard since I landed in the Silver Islands. Tappy,
my boy, I believe we are going to be friends! But let's forget the
past and think of the present!"

The Scarecrow embraced his Imperial Punster on the spot. "Let's find
something jolly to do," he suggested.

"Would your Extreme Highness care for kites?" asked Happy. "'Tis a
favorite sport here!"

"Would I! But wait, I will disguise myself." Hiding his royal hat
under the bench, he put on Happy Toko's broad-rimmed peasant hat. It
turned down all 'round and almost hid his face. Then he turned his
robe inside out and declared himself ready.

They passed through a small silver town before they reached the field
where the kites were to be flown, and the Scarecrow was delighted
with its picturesque and quaint appearance. The streets were narrow
and full of queer shops. Silver lanterns and little pennants hung
from each door, the merchants and maidens in their gay sedans and the
people afoot made a bright and lively picture.

"If I could just live here instead of in the palace," mused the
Scarecrow, pausing before a modest rice shop. It is dangerous to stop
in the narrow streets, and Happy jerked his master aside just in time
to prevent his being trodden on by a huge camel. It sniffed at the
Scarecrow suspiciously, and they were forced to flatten themselves
against a wall to let it pass. Happy anxiously hurried the Emperor
through the town, and they soon arrived at the kite flying field. A
great throng had gathered to watch the exhibition, and there were
more kites than one would see in a lifetime here. Huge fish, silver
paper dragons, birds--every sort and shape of kite was tugging at its
string, and hundreds of Silver Islanders--boys, girls and grown-ups--
were looking on.

"How interesting," said the Scarecrow, fascinated by a huge dragon
that floated just over his head. "I wish Dorothy could see this, I do
indeed!"

But the dragon kite seemed almost alive, and horrors! Just as it
swooped down, a hook in the tail caught in the Scarecrow's collar,
and before Happy Toko could even wink, the Emperor of the Silver
Islands was sailing towards the clouds. The Scarecrow, as you must
know, weighs almost nothing, and the people shouted with glee, for
they thought him a dummy man and part of the performance. But Happy
Toko ran after the kite as fast as his fat little legs would carry
him.

"Alas, alas, I shall lose my position!" wailed Happy Toko, quite
convinced that the Scarecrow would be dashed to pieces on the rocks.
"Oh, putty head that I am to set myself against the Grand Chew Chew!"

The Scarecrow, however, after recovering from the first shock, began
to enjoy himself. Holding fast to the dragon's tail, he looked down
with great interest upon his dominions. Rocks, mountains, tall silver
pagodas, drooping willow trees, flashed beneath him. Truly a
beautiful island! His gaze strayed over the silver waters surrounding
the island, and he was astonished to see a great fleet sailing into
the harbor--a great fleet of singular vessels with silken sails.

"What's this?" thought the Scarecrow. But just then the dragon kite
became suddenly possessed. It jerked him up, it jerked him down, and
shook him this way and that. His hat flew off, his arms and legs
whirled wildly, and pieces of straw began to float downward. Then the
hook ripped and tore through his coat and, making a terrible slit in
his back, came out. Down, down, down flashed the Scarecrow and landed
in a heap on the rocks. Poor Happy Toko rushed toward him with
streaming eyes.

"Oh radiant and immortal Scarecrowcus, what have they done to you?"
he moaned, dropping on his knees beside the flimsy shape of the
Emperor.

"Merely knocked out my honorable stuffing," mumbled the Scarecrow.
"Now Tappy, my dear fellow, will you just turn me over? There's a
rock in my eye that keeps me from thinking."

Happy Toko, at the sound of a voice from the rumpled heap of
clothing, gave a great leap.

"Is there any straw about?" asked the Scarecrow anxiously. "Why don't
you turn me over?"

"It's his ghost," moaned Happy Toko, and because he dared not disobey
a royal ghost, he turned the Scarecrow over with trembling hands.

"Don't be alarmed," said the Scarecrow, smiling reassuringly. "I'm
not breakable like you meat people. A little straw will make me good
as new. A little straw--straw, do you hear?" For Happy's pigtail was
still on end, and he was shaking so that his silver shoes clattered
on the rocks.

"I command you to fetch straw!" cried the Scarecrow at last, in an
angry voice. Happy dashed away.

When he returned with an arm full of straw, the Scarecrow managed to
convince him that he was quite alive. "It is impossible to kill a
person from Oz," he explained proudly, "and that is why my present
figure is so much more satisfactory than yours. I do not have to eat
or sleep and can always be repaired. Have you some safety pins?"
Happy produced several and under the Scarecrow's direction stuffed
out his chest and pinned up his rents.

"Let us return," said the Scarecrow. "I've had enough pleasure for
one day, and can't you sing something, Tappy?" Running and fright had
somewhat affected Happy's voice, but he squeaked out a funny little
song, and the two, keeping time to the tune, came without further
mishap to the Imperial gardens. Happy had just set the royal hat upon
the Scarecrow's head and brushed off his robes when a company of
courtiers dashed out of the palace door and came running toward them.

"Great Cornstarch!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, sitting heavily down on
the silver bench. "What's the matter now? Here are all the Pig-heads
on the Island, and look how old Chew Chew is puffing!"

"One would expect a Chew Chew to puff," observed Happy slyly. "One
would--" But he got no further, for the whole company was upon them.

"Save us! Save us!" wailed the courtiers, forgetting the royal edict
and falling on their faces.

"What from?" asked the Scarecrow, holding fast to the silver bench.

"The King--the King of the Golden Islands!" shrieked the Grand Chew
Chew.

"Ah yes!" murmured the Scarecrow, frowning thoughtfully. "Was that
his fleet coming into the harbor?"

The Grand Chew Chew jumped up in astonishment. "How could your
Highness see the fleet from here?" he stuttered.

"Not from here--there," said the Scarecrow, pointing upward and
winking at Happy Toko. "My Highness goes very high, you see!"

"Your Majesty does not seem to realize the seriousness of the
matter," choked the Grand Chew Chew. "He will set fire to the island
and make us all slaves." At this, the courtiers began banging their
heads distractedly on the grass.

"Set fire to the island!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, jumping to his
feet. "Then peace to _my_ ashes! Tappy, will you see that they are sent
back to Oz?"

"Save us! Save us!" screamed the frightened Silvermen.

"The prophecy of the beanstalk has promised that you would save us.
You are the Emperor Chang Wang Woe," persisted the Grand Chew Chew,
waving his long arms.

"Woe is me," murmured the Scarecrow, clasping his yellow gloves. "But
let me think."



CHAPTER 9

"SAVE US WITH YOUR MAGIC, EXALTED ONE!"

For several minutes, the Scarecrow sat perfectly still while the
company stood shaking in their shoes. Then he asked loudly, "Where is
the Imperial Army?"

"It has retired to the caves at the end of the Island," quavered the
Grand Chew Chew.

"I thought as much," said the Scarecrow. "But never mind, there are
quite a lot of us."

"Us!" spluttered a tall Silverman indignantly. "We are not common
soldiers."

"No, very uncommon ones, but you have hard heads and long nails, and
I dare say will manage somehow. Come on, let's go. Chew, you may take
the lead."

"Go!" shrieked the Grand Chew Chew. "Us?" The Courtiers began backing
away in alarm. "Where--er--what--are your Highness' plans?"

"Why, just to conquer the King of the Golden Islands and send him
back home," said the Scarecrow, smiling engagingly. "That's what you
wanted, isn't it?"

"But it is not honorable for noblemen to fight. It--"

"Oh, of course, if you prefer burning--" The Scarecrow rose
unsteadily and started for the garden gates. Not a person stirred.
The Scarecrow looked back, and his reproachful face was too much for
Happy Toko.

"I'll come, exalted and radiant Scarecrowcus! Wait, honorable and
valiant Sir!"

"Bring a watering can, if you love me," called the Scarecrow over his
shoulder, and Happy, snatching one from a frightened gardener, dashed
after his Master.

"If things get too hot, I'd like to know that you can put me out,"
said the Scarecrow, his voice quivering with emotion. "You shall be
rewarded for this, my brave Tappy."

Happy did not answer, for his teeth were chattering so he could not
speak.

The harbor lay just below the Imperial Palace, and the Scarecrow and
Happy hurried on through the crowds of fleeing Silvermen, their
household goods packed upon their heads. Some cheered faintly for
Chang Wang Woe, but none offered to follow, save the faithful Happy.

"Is this king old?" asked the Scarecrow, looking anxiously at the
small boats full of warriors that were putting out from the fleet.

"He is the son of the King whom your Majesty conquered fifty years
ago," gulped Happy. "Ha--has your Imperial Highness any--plan?"

"Not yet," said the Scarecrow cheerfully, "but I'm thinking very
hard."

"Then, goodbye to Silver Island!" choked Happy Toko, dropping the
watering can with a crash.

"Never mind," said the Scarecrow kindly. "If they shoot me and I
catch fire, I'll jump in the water and you must fish me out, Tappy.
Now please don't talk any more. I must think!"

Poor Happy Toko had nothing else to say, for he considered his day
finished. The first of the invaders were already landing on the
beach, and standing up in a small boat, encased in glittering gold
armor, was the King of the Golden Islands, himself. The sun was quite
hot, and there was a smell of gunpowder in the air.

Now the Scarecrow had encountered many dangers in Oz and had usually
thought his way out of them, but as they came nearer and nearer to
the shore and no idea presented itself, he began to feel extremely
nervous. A bullet fired from the king's boat tore through his hat,
and the smoke made him more anxious than ever about his straw
stuffing. He felt hurriedly in his pocket, and his clumsy fingers
closed over the little fan he had plucked from the bean pole.

Partly from agitation and partly because he did not know what else to
do, the Scarecrow flipped the fan open. At that minute, a mighty roar
went up from the enemy, for at the first motion of the fan they had
been jerked fifty feet into the air, and there they hung suspended
over their ships, kicking and squealing for dear life. The Scarecrow
was as surprised as they, and as for Happy Toko, he fell straightway
on his nose!

"Magic!" exclaimed the Scarecrow. "Someone is helping us," and he
began fanning himself gently with the little fan, waiting to see what
would happen next. At each wave of the fan, the King of the Golden
Islands and his men flew higher until at last not one of them could
be seen from the shore.

"The fan. The magic is in the fan!" gasped Happy Toko, jumping up and
embracing the Scarecrow.

"Why, what do you mean?" asked the Scarecrow, closing the fan with a
snap. Happy's answer was drowned in a huge splash. As soon as the fan
was closed, down whirled the king's army into the sea, and each man
struck the water with such force that the spray rose high as a
skyscraper. And not till then did the Scarecrow realize the power of
the little fan he had been saving for Dorothy.

"Saved!" screamed Happy Toko, dancing up and down. "Hurrah for the
Emperor!"

      The Emperor, without a plan,
      Has won the victory with a fan.

The Silver Islanders had paused in their flight at the queer noises
coming from the harbor, and now all of them, hearing Tappy Oko's
cries, came crowding down to the shore and were soon cheering
themselves hoarse. No wonder! The drenched soldiers of the king were
climbing swiftly back into their boats, and when they were all
aboard, the Scarecrow waved his fan sidewise (he did not want to blow
them up again), and the ships swept out of the harbor so fast that
the water churned to silver suds behind them, and they soon were out
of sight.

"Ah!" cried the Grand Chew Chew, arriving breathlessly at this point,
"We have won the day!"

"So we have!" chuckled the Scarecrow, putting his arm around Happy
Toko. "Call the brave army and decorate the generals!"

"It shall be done," said the Grand Chew Chew, frowning at Happy.
"There shall be a great celebration, a feast, and fireworks."

"Fireworks," quavered the Scarecrow, clutching his Imperial Punster.
By this time, the Silver Islanders were crowding around the Emperor,
shouting and squealing for joy, and before he could prevent it, they
had placed him on their shoulders and carried him in triumph to the
palace. He managed to signal Happy, and Happy nodded reassuringly and
ran off as fast as his fat little legs could patter. He arrived at
the palace almost as soon as the Scarecrow, lugging a giant silver
watering can, and, sitting calmly on the steps of the throne, fanned
himself with his hat. The Scarecrow eyed the watering can with
satisfaction.

"Now let them have their old fireworks," he muttered under his
breath, and settled himself comfortably. The Grand Chew Chew was
hopping about like a ditched kite, arranging for the celebration. The
courtiers were shaking hands with themselves and forming in a long
line. A great table was being set in the hall.

"What a fuss they are making over nothing," said the Scarecrow to
Happy Toko. "Now in Oz when we win a victory, we all play some jolly
game and sit down to dinner with Ozma. Why, they haven't even set a
place for you, Happy!"

"I'd rather sit here, amiable Master," sighed Happy Toko happily. "Is
the little fan safely closed?"

The Scarecrow felt in his pocket to make sure, then leaned forward in
surprise. The Royal Silver Army were marching stiffly into the hall,
and the courtiers were bobbing and bowing and cheering like mad.

The General came straight to the great silver throne, clicked his
silver heels, bowed, and stood at attention.

"Well," said the Scarecrow, surveying this splendid person curiously,
"what is it?"

"They have come for their decorations," announced the Grand Chew
Chew, stepping up with a large silver platter full of medals.

"But I thought Tappy Oko and I saved the Island," chuckled the
Scarecrow, nudging the Imperial Punster.

"Had the Imperial Army not retired and left the field to you, there
would have been no victory," faltered the General in a timid voice.
"Therefore, in a way we are responsible for the victory. A great
general always knows when to retire."

"There's something in that," admitted the Scarecrow, scratching his
head thoughtfully. "Go ahead and decorate 'em, Chew Chew!"

This the Grand Chew Chew proceeded to do, making such a long speech
to each soldier that half of the Court fell asleep and the Scarecrow
fidgeted uncomfortably.

"They remind me of the Army of Oz," he confided to Happy Toko, "but
we never have long speeches in Oz. I declare, I wish I could go to
sleep, too, and that's something I have never seen any use in
before."

"They've just begun," yawned Happy Toko, nearly rolling down the
steps of the throne, and Happy was not far wrong, for all afternoon
one after the other of the courtiers arose and droned about the great
victory, and as they all addressed themselves to the Scarecrow, he
was forced to listen politely. When the speeches were over, there was
still the grand banquet to be got through, and as the Silver
Islanders ate much the same fare as their Chinese cousins, you can
imagine the poor Scarecrow's feelings.

"Ugh!" shivered the Scarecrow as the strange dishes appeared, "I'm
glad none of my friends are here. How fortunate that I'm stuffed with
straw!" The broiled mice, the stewed shark fins and the bird nest
soup made him stare. He had ordered Happy Toko to be placed at his
side, and to watch him happily at work with his silver chopsticks and
porcelain spoon was the only satisfaction he got out of the feast.

"And what is that?" he asked, pointing to a steaming bowl that had
just been placed before Happy.

"Minced cat, your Highness," replied Happy, sprinkling it generously
with silver polish.

"Cat?" shrieked the Scarecrow, pouncing to his feet in horror. "Do
you mean to tell me you are eating a poor, innocent, little cat?"

"Not a poor one at all. A very rich one, I should say," replied Happy
Toko with his mouth full. "Ah, had your Highness only your old body,
how you would enjoy this!"

"Never!" shouted the Scarecrow so loudly that all of the Courtiers
looked up in surprise. "How dare you eat innocent cats?" Indignantly
he thought of Dorothy's pet kitten back in Oz. Oz--why had he ever
left that wonderful country?

"Your Highness has eaten hundreds," announced the Grand Chew Chew
calmly. "Hundreds!"

The Scarecrow dropped back into his chair, too shocked for speech.
He, the Scarecrow of Oz, had eaten hundreds of cats! What would
Dorothy say to that? Ugh! This was his first experience with Silver
Island fare. He had always spent the dinner hours in the garden. He
sighed, and looked wistfully at the bean pole in the center of the
hall. Every minute he was feeling less and less like the Emperor of
the Silver Island and more and more like the plain Scarecrow of Oz.

"Your Majesty seems out of spirits," said Happy Toko as he placed
himself and the huge watering can beside the Emperor's bench in the
garden later in the evening.

"I wish I were," said the Scarecrow. "To have an Emperor's spirit
wished on you is no joke, my dear Tappy. It's a blinking bore!" At
that moment, the fireworks commenced. The garden, ablaze with many
shaped silver lanterns, looked more like Fairyland than ever. But
each rocket made the Scarecrow wince. Showers of stars and
butterflies fell 'round his head, fiery dragons leaped over the
trees, and in all the Fourth of July celebrations you could imagine
there were never such marvelous fireworks as these. No wonder Happy
Toko, gazing in delight, forgot his promises to his Royal Master.

Soon the Scarecrow's fears were realized, and his straw stuffing
began to smoke.

"Put me out! Put me out!" cried the Scarecrow, as a shower of sparks
settled in his lap. The royal band made such a din and the courtiers
such a clatter that Happy did not hear.

All of the Silver Islanders were intent on the display, and they
forgot all about their unhappy and smoking Emperor.

"Help! Water! Water! Fire!" screamed the Scarecrow, jumping off his
throne and knocking Happy head over heels. Thus brought to his
senses, Happy hurriedly seized the watering can and sprinkled its
contents on the smoking Emperor.

"Am I out?" gasped the Emperor anxiously. "A fine way to celebrate a
victory, lighting me up like a Roman candle!"

"Yes, dear Master," said the repentant Happy, helping the dripping
Scarecrow to his feet, "it only scorched your royal robe. And it's
all over, anyway. Let us go in."

The dripping Emperor was quite ready to follow his Imperial Punster's
advice.

"Now that I am put out, let us by all means go in," said the
Scarecrow gloomily, and the two slipped off without anyone noticing
their departure.

"I'm afraid I'll have to have some new stuffing tomorrow," observed
the Scarecrow, sinking dejectedly on his throne. "Tappy, my dear boy,
after this never leave me alone, do you hear?" Happy Toko made no
reply. He had fallen asleep beside the Imperial Throne.

The Scarecrow might have called his court, but he was in no mood for
more of the Silver Islanders' idea of a good time. He longed for the
dear friends of his loved Land of Oz.

One by one the lights winked out in the gardens, and the noisy
company dispersed, and soon no one in the palace was awake but the
Scarecrow. His straw was wet and soggy, and even his excellent brains
felt damp and dull.

"If it weren't for Tappy Oko, how lonely I should be." He stared
through the long, dim, empty hall with its shimmering silver screens
and vases. "I wonder what little Dorothy is doing," sighed the
Scarecrow wistfully.



CHAPTER 10

PRINCESS OZMA AND BETSY BOBBIN TALK IT OVER

"Dorothy must be having a lovely time at the Scarecrow's," remarked
Betsy Bobbin to Ozma one afternoon as they sat reading in the Royal
Gardens several days after Dorothy's departure from the Emerald City
of Oz.

"One always has a jolly time at the Scarecrow's," laughed the little
Queen of Oz. "I must look in my Magic Picture and see what they are
doing. Too bad she missed the A-B-Sea Serpent and Rattlesnakes.
Weren't they the funniest creatures?"

Both the little girls (for Ozma is really just a little girl) went
off into a gale of laughter. The two queer creatures had followed the
Scarecrow's advice and had spent their vacation in the Emerald City,
and partly because they were so dazzled by their surroundings and
partly because they have no sort of memories whatever, they never
mentioned the Scarecrow himself or said anything about his plan to
hunt his family tree. They talked incessantly of the Mer City and
told innumerable A-B-Sea stories to Scraps and the Tin Woodman and
the children of the Emerald City. When they were ready to go, the
A-B-Sea Serpent snapped off its X block for Ozma. X, he said, meant
almost everything, and pretty well expressed his gratitude to the
lovely little ruler of Oz. Ozma in turn gave each of the visitors an
emerald collar, and that very morning they had started back to the
Munchkin River, and all the celebrities of Oz had gotten up to see
them off.

"Maybe they'll come again some time," said Betsy Bobbin, swinging her
feet. "But look, Ozma, here comes a messenger." A messenger it surely
was, dressed in the quaint red costume of the Quadlings. It was from
Glinda, the Good Sorceress, and caused the Princess to sigh with
vexation.

"Tell Jack Pumpkinhead to harness the Sawhorse to the red wagon,"
said Ozma after glancing hastily at the little note. "The Horners and
Hoppers are at war again. And tell the Wizard to make ready for a
journey."

"May I come, too,?" asked Betsy. Ozma nodded with a troubled little
frown, and Betsy bustled off importantly. Not many little girls are
called upon to help settle wars and rule a country as wonderful as
Oz.

The Horners and Hoppers are a quarrelsome and curious folk living in
the Quadling mountains, and soon Ozma, Jack Pumpkinhead, Betsy and
the Wizard of Oz were rattling off at the best speed the Sawhorse
could manage. This was pretty fast, for the little horse, being made
of wood and magically brought to life, never tires and could outrun
anything on legs in the fairy Kingdom of Oz.

But the fact that interests us is that Ozma did not look in the Magic
Picture or see what exciting adventures the Scarecrow and Dorothy
really were having!

As for Professor Wogglebug, who had caused all the trouble, he was
busily at work on the twelfth chapter of the Royal Book of Oz, which
he had modestly headed:

           H. M. WOGGLEBUG T.E., PRINCE OF BUGS,

            Cultured and Eminent Educator
                  and also
      Great Grand and General Genealogist of Oz.



CHAPTER 11

SIR HOKUS OVERCOMETH THE GIANT

"I don't believe we'll ever find the way out of this forest."

Dorothy stopped with a discouraged little sigh and leaned against a
tree. They had followed the road for several hours. First it had been
fine and wide, but it had gradually dwindled to a crooked little path
that wound crazily in and out through the trees. Although it was
almost noonday, not a ray of sun penetrated through the dim green
depths.

"Methinks," said Sir Hokus, peering into the gloom ahead, "that a
great adventure is at hand."

The Cowardly Lion put back his ears. "What makes you methink so?" he
rumbled anxiously.

"Hark thee!" said Sir Hokus, holding up his finger warningly. From a
great way off sounded a curious thumping. It was coming nearer and
nearer.

"Good gracious!" cried Dorothy, catching hold of the Cowardly Lion's
mane.

"This is worse than Pokes!"

"Perchance it is a dragon," exulted the Knight, drawing his short
sword. "Ah, how it would refresh me to slay a dragon!"

"I don't relish dragons myself. Scorched my tongue on one once," said
the Cowardly Lion huskily. "But I'll fight with you, brother Hokus.
Stand back, Dorothy dear."

As the thuds grew louder, the Knight fairly danced up and down with
excitement. "Approach, villain!" he roared lustily.

"Approach till I impale thee on my lance. Ah, had I but a horse!"

"I'd let you ride on my back if it weren't for that hard tin suit,"
said the Cowardly Lion. "But cheer up, my dear Hokus, your voice is a
little hoarse." Dorothy giggled nervously, then seized hold of a
small tree, for the whole forest was rocking.

"How now!" gasped the Knight. There was a terrific quake that threw
Sir Hokus on his face and sent every hair in the lion's mane on end,
and then a great foot came crashing down through the treetops not
three paces from the little party. Before they could even swallow, a
giant hand flashed down-ward, jerked up a handful of trees by the
roots, and disappeared, while a voice from somewhere way above
shouted:

      What are little humans for?
      To feed the giant Bangladore.
      Broiled or toasted, baked or roasted,
      I smell three or maybe four!

"You hear that?" quavered the Cowardly Lion. Sir Hokus did not
answer. His helmet had been jammed down by his fall, and he was
tugging it upward with both hands. Frightened though Dorothy was, she
ran to the Knight's assistance.

"Have at you!" cried Sir Hokus as soon as the opening in his helmet
was opposite his eyes. "Forward!"

"My heart is beating a retreat," gulped the Cowardly Lion, but he
bounded boldly after Sir Hokus.

"Varlet!" hissed the Knight, and raising his sword gave a mighty
slash at the giant's ankle, which was broad as three tree trunks,
while the Cowardly Lion gave a great spring and sank his teeth in the
giant's huge leg.

"Ouch!" roared the giant in a voice that shook every leaf in the
forest. "You stop, or I'll tell my father!" With that, he gave a hop
that sent Sir Hokus flying into the treetops, stumbled over a huge
rock, and came crashing to the earth, smashing trees like grass
blades. At the giant's first scream, Dorothy shut her eyes and,
putting her hands over her ears, had run as far and as fast as she
could. At the awful crash, she stopped short, opened her eyes, and
stared 'round giddily.

The giant was flat on his back, but as he was stretched as far as
four city blocks, only half of him was visible. The Cowardly Lion
still clung to his leg, and he was gurgling and struggling in a way
Dorothy could not understand.

She looked around in a panic for the Knight. Just then, Sir Hokus
dropped from the branch of a tree.

"Uds daggers!" he puffed, looking ruefully at his sword, which had
snapped off at the handle, "'Tis a pretty rogue!"

"Don't you think we'd better run?" shiver Dorothy, thinking of the
giant's song.

"Not while I wear these colors!" exclaimed Sir Hokus, proudly
touching Dorothy's hair ribbon, which still adorned his arm. "Come,
my good Lion, let us dispatch this braggart and saucy monster."

"Father!" screamed the giant, making no attempt to move.

"He seems to be frightened, himself," whispered Dorothy to the
Knight. "But whatever is the matter with the Cowardly Lion?"

At that minute, the Cowardly Lion gave a great jerk and began backing
with his four feet braced. The piece of giant leg that he had hold of
stretched and stretched, and while Sir Hokus and Dorothy stared in
amazement, it snapped off and the Cowardly Lion rolled head over
paws.

"Taffy!" roared the Cowardly Lion, sitting up and trying to open his
jaws, which were firmly stuck together.

"Taffy!" At this, Sir Hokus sprang nimbly on the giant's leg, ran up
his chest, and perched bravely on his peppermint collar.

"Surrender, Knave!" he demanded threateningly. Dorothy, seeing she
could do nothing to help the Cowardly Lion, followed. On her way up,
she broke off a tiny piece of his coat and found it most delicious
chocolate.

"Why, he's all made of candy!" she cried excitedly.

"Oh, hush!" sobbed the giant, rolling his great sourball eyes. "I'd
be eaten in a minute if it were known."

"You were mighty anxious to eat us a while ago," said Dorothy,
looking longingly at the giant's coat buttons. They seemed to be
large marshmallows.

"Go away!" screamed the giant, shaking so that Dorothy slid into his
vest pocket. "No one under forty feet is allowed in this forest!"

Dorothy climbed crossly out of the giant's pocket. "We didn't come
because we wanted to," she assured him, wiping the chocolate off her
nose.

"Odds bodikins! I cannot fight a great baby like this," sighed Sir
Hokus, dodging just in time a great, sugary tear that had rolled down
the giant's nose. "He's got to apologize for that song, though."

"Wait!" cried Dorothy suddenly. "I have an idea. If you set us down
on the edge of the forest and give us all your vest buttons for
lunch, we won't tell anyone you're made of candy. We'll let you go,"
she called loudly, for the giant had begun to sob again.

"Won't you? Will you?" sniffed the foolish giant.

"Never sing that song again!" commanded the Knight sternly.

"No, Sir," answered the giant meekly. "Did your dog chew much of my
leg, Sir?" Then, before Dorothy or Sir Hokus had time to way a word,
they were snatched up in sticky fingers and next minute were dropped
with a thump in a large field of daisies.

"Oh!" spluttered Dorothy as the giant made off on his taffy legs.
"Oh, we've forgotten the Cowardly Lion!" But at that minute, the
giant reappeared, and the lion was dropped beside them.

"What's this? What's this?" growled the Cowardly Lion, looking around
wildly.

"We got him to lift us out of the forest," explained Dorothy. "Have
you swallowed the taffy?" The lion was still dizzy from his ride and
only shook his head feebly.

Sir Hokus sighed and sat heavily down on a large rock. "There is no
sort of honor, methinks, in overcoming a candy giant," he observed,
looking wistfully at the plume still pinned to Dorothy's dress. "Ah,
had it but been a proper fight!"

"You didn't know he was candy. I think you were just splendid."
Jumping up, Dorothy fastened the plume in the Knight's helmet. "And
you're talking just beautifully, more like a Knight every minute,"
she added with conviction. Sir Hokus tried not to look pleased.

"Give me a meat enemy! My teeth ache yet! First singing, then
candy-leg pulling! Gr-ugh! What next?" growled the Cowardly Lion.

"Why, lunch, if you feel like eating," said Dorothy, beginning to
give out the vest buttons which the giant had obediently ripped off
and left for them. They _were_ marshmallows, the size of pie plates,
and Dorothy and Sir Hokus found them quite delicious. The Cowardly
Lion, however, after a doubtful sniff and sneeze from the powdered
sugar, declined and went off to find something more to his taste.

"We had better take some of these along," said Dorothy when she and
Sir Hokus had eaten several. "We may need them later."

"Everything is yellow, so we must be in the Winkie Country,"
announced the Cowardly Lion, who had just returned from his lunch.
"There's a road, too."

"Mayhap it will take us to the jeweled city of your gracious Queen."
Sir Hokus shaded his eyes and stared curiously at the long lane
stretching invitingly ahead of them.

"Well, anyway, we're out of the forest and Pokes, and maybe we'll
meet someone who will tell us about the Scarecrow. Come on!" cried
Dorothy gaily. "I think we're on the right track this time."



CHAPTER 12

DOROTHY AND SIR HOKUS COME TO FIX CITY

The afternoon went pleasantly for the three travelers. The road was
wide and shady and really seemed a bit familiar. Dorothy rode
comfortably on the Cowardly Lion's back and to pass the time told Sir
Hokus all about Oz. He was particularly interested in the Scarecrow.

"Grammercy! He should be knighted!" he exclaimed, slapping his knee,
as Dorothy told how the clever straw man had helped outwit the Gnome
King when that wicked little rascal had tried to keep them prisoners
in his underground kingdom.

"But, go to! Where is the gallant man now?" The Knight sobered
quickly. "Mayhap in need of a strong arm! Mayhap at the mercy of some
terrible monster!"

"Oh, I hope not!" cried Dorothy, dismayed at so dark a picture. "Why,
oh why, did he bother about his family tree?"

"Trust the Scarecrow to take care of himself," said the Cowardly Lion
in a gruff voice. Nevertheless, he quickened his steps. "The sooner
we reach the Emerald City, the sooner we'll know where he is!"

The country through which they were passing was beautiful, but quite
deserted. About five o'clock, they came to a clear little stream, and
after Dorothy and Sir Hokus had washed their faces and the Cowardly
Lion had taken a little plunge, they all felt refreshed. Later they
came to a fine pear orchard, and as no one was about they helped
themselves generously.

The more Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion saw of Sir Hokus, the fonder
of him they grew. He was so kind-hearted and so polite.

"He'll be great company for us back in the Emerald City," whispered
the Cowardly Lion as the Knight went off to get Dorothy a drink from
a little spring. "That is, if he forgets this grammercy, bludgeon
stuff."

"I think it sounds lovely," said Dorothy, "and he's remembering more
of it all the time. But I wonder why there are no people here. I do
hope we meet some before night." But no person did they meet. As it
grew darker, Sir Hokus' armor began to creak in a quite frightful
manner. Armor is not meant for walking, and the poor Knight was stiff
and tired, but he made no complaint.

"Need oiling, don't you?" asked the Cowardly Lion, peering anxiously
at him through the gloom.

"Joints in my armor a bit rusty," puffed Sir Hokus, easing one foot
and then the other. "Ah, had I my good horse!" He expressively waved
a piece of the giant's button at which he had been nibbling.

"Better climb up behind Dorothy," advised the Cowardly Lion, but Sir
Hokus shook his head, for he knew the lion was tired, too.

"I'll manage famously. This very night I may find me a steed!"

"How?" asked the lion with a yawn.

"If I sleep beneath these trees, I may have a Knight mare," chuckled
Sir Hokus triumphantly.

"Br-rrr!" roared the Cowardly Lion while Dorothy clapped her hands.
But they were not to sleep beneath the trees after all, for a sudden
turn in the road brought them right to the gates of another city.
They knew it must be a city because a huge, lighted sign hung over
the gate.

"Fix City," read Dorothy. "What a funny name!"

"Maybe they can fix us up," rumbled the lion, winking at Sir Hokus.

"Perchance we shall hear news of the valiant Scarecrow!" cried the
Knight, and limping forward he thumped on the gate with his mailed
fist. Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion pressed close behind him and
waited impatiently for someone to open the gate.

A bell rang loud back in the town. The next instant, the gates flew
open so suddenly that the three adventurers were flung violently on
their faces.

"Out upon them!" blustered Sir Hokus, getting up stiffly and running
to help Dorothy. "What way is this to welcome strangers?" He pulled
the little girl hastily to her feet, then they all ran forward, for
the gates were swinging shut again.

It was almost as light as day, for lanterns were everywhere, but
strangely enough they seemed to dart about like huge fireflies, and
Dorothy ducked involuntarily as a red one bobbed down almost in her
face. Then she gasped in real earnest and caught hold of Sir Hokus.

"Uds daggers!" wheezed the Knight. Two large bushes were running down
the path, and right in front of Dorothy the larger caught the smaller
and began pulling out its leaves.

"Leave off! Leave off!" screamed the little bush.

"That's what I'm doing," said the big bush savagely. "There won't be
a leaf on when I get through with you."

"Unhand him, villain!" cried Sir Hokus, waving his sword at the large
bush. The two bushes looked up in surprise, and when they saw
Dorothy, the Cowardly Lion and Sir Hokus, they fell into each other's
branches and burst into the most uproarious laughter.

"My dear Magnolia, this is rich! Oh, dear fellow, wait till Sit sees
this; he will be convulsed!" Quite forgetting their furious quarrel,
the two went rollicking down the path together, stopping every few
minutes to look back and laugh at the three strangers.

"Is this usual?" asked Sir Hokus, looking quite dazed.

"I never heard of bushes talking or running around, but I confess I'm
a few centuries behind times!"

"Neither did I!" exclaimed Dorothy. "But then--almost anything's
likely to happen in Oz."

"If these lanterns don't look out something will happen. I'll break
'em to bits," growled the Cowardly Lion, who had been dodging half a
dozen at once.

"How would we look--out?" sniffed one, flying at Dorothy.

"You could light out--or go out," giggled the little girl.

"We never go out unless we're put out," cried another, but as the
Cowardly Lion made a few springs, they flew high into the air and
began talking indignantly among themselves. By this time, the three
had become accustomed to the changing lights.

"I wonder where the people are," said Dorothy, peering down a wide
avenue. "There don't seem to be any houses. Oh, look!"

Three tables set for dinner with the most appetizing viands were
walking jauntily down the street, talking fluent china.

"There must be people!" cried Dorothy.

"One dinner for each of us," rumbled the Cowardly Lion, licking his
chops. "Come on!"

"Perchance they will invite us. If we follow the dinners, we'll come
to the diners," said Sir Hokus mildly.

"Right--as usual." The Cowardly Lion looked embarrassed, for he had
intended pouncing on the tables without further ceremony.

"Hush! Let's go quietly. If they hear us, they may run and upset the
dishes," warned Dorothy. So the three walked softly after the dinner
tables, their curiosity about the people of Fix growing keener at
every step. Several chairs, a sofa and a clothes tree rushed past
them, but as Dorothy said later to Ozma, after talking bushes,
nothing surprised them. The tables turned the corner at the end of
the avenue three abreast, and the sight that greeted Dorothy and her
comrades was strange indeed. Down each side of a long street as far
as they could see stood rows and rows of people. Each one was in the
exact center of a chalked circle, and they were so still that Dorothy
thought they must be statues.

But no sooner had the three tables made their appearance than bells
began ringing furiously all up and down the street, and dinner tables
and chairs came running from every direction. All the inhabitants of
Fix City looked alike. They had large, round heads, broad placid
faces, double chins, and no waists whatever. Their feet were flat and
about three times as long as the longest you have ever seen. The
women wore plain Mother Hubbard dresses and straw sailor hats, and
the men gingham suits.

While the three friends were observing all this, the tables had been
taking their places. One stopped before each Fix, and the chairs,
after much bumping and quarreling, placed themselves properly. At a
signal from the Fix in the center, the whole company sat down without
so much as moving their feet. Dorothy, Sir Hokus and the Cowardly
Lion had been too interested to speak, but at this minute a whole
flock of the mischievous lanterns clustered over their heads, and at
the sudden blare of light the whole street stopped eating and stared.

"Oh!" cried the Fix nearest them, pointing with his fork, "Look at
the runabouts!"

"This way, please! This way, please! Don't bark your shins. Don't
take any more steps than you can help!" boomed an important voice
from the middle of the street. So down the center marched the three,
feeling--as the Cowardly Lion put it--exactly like a circus.

"Stop! Names, please!" The Fix next to the center put up his knife
commandingly. Sir Hokus stepped forward with a bow:

"Princess Dorothy of Oz, the Cowardly Lion of Oz."

"And Sir Hokus of Pokes," roared the Lion as the Knight modestly
stepped back without announcing himself.

"Sir Pokus of Hoax, Howardly Kion of Boz, and Little Girl Beginning
with D," bellowed the Fix, "meet His Royal Highness, King Fix It, and
the noble Fixitives."

"Little Girl Beginning with D! That's too long," complained the King,
who, with the exception of his crown, looked like all the rest of
them, "I'll leave out the middle. What do you want, Little With D?"

"My name is Dorothy, and if your Highness could give us some dinner
and tell us something about the Scarecrow and--"

"One thing at a time, please," said the King reprovingly. "What does
Poker want, and Boz? Have they anything to spend?"

"Only the night, an' it please your Gracious Highness," said Sir
Hokus with his best bow.

"It doesn't please me especially," said the King, taking a sip of
water. "And there! You've brought up another question. How do you
want to spend it?"

He folded his hands helplessly on the table and looked appealingly at
the Fix next to him. "How am I to settle all these questions,
Sticken? First they come running around like crazy chairs, and--"

"You might ring for a settle," suggested Sticken, looking curiously
at Sir Hokus. The King leaned back with a sigh of relief, then
touched a bell. There were at least twenty bells set on a high post
at his right hand, and all of the Fixes seemed to have similar bell
posts.

"He's talking perfect nonsense," said Dorothy angrily. The Cowardly
Lion began to roll his eyes ominously.

"Let me handle this, my dear. I'm used to Kings," whispered Sir
Hokus. "Most of 'em talk nonsense. But if he grows wroth, we'll have
all the furniture in the place around our ears. Now just--"

Bump! Sir Hokus and Dorothy sat down quite suddenly. The settle had
arrived and hit them smartly behind the knees. The Cowardly Lion
dodged just in time and lay down with a growl beside it.

"Now that you're settled," began the King in a resigned voice, "we
might try again. What is your motto?"

This took even Sir Hokus by surprise, but before he could answer, the
King snapped out:

"Come late and stay early! How's that?"

"Very good," said Sir Hokus with a wink at Dorothy.

"Next time, don't come at all," mumbled Sticken Plaster, his mouth
full of biscuit.

"And you wanted?" the King asked uneasily.

"Dinner for three," said the Knight promptly and with another bow.

"Now that's talking." The King looked admiringly at Sir Hokus. "This
Little With D had matters all tangled up. One time at a thing! That's
my motto!"

Leaning over, the King pressed another button. By this time, the
Fixes had lost interest in the visitors and went calmly on with their
dinners. Three tables came pattering up, and the settle drew itself
up of its own accord. Dorothy placed the Cowardly Lion's dinner on
the ground, and then she and Sir Hokus enjoyed the first good meal
they had had since they left Pokes. They were gradually becoming used
to their strange surroundings.

"You ask him about the Scarecrow," begged Dorothy. Everybody had
finished, and the tables were withdrawing in orderly groups. The King
was leaning sleepily back in his chair.

"Ahem," began the Knight, rising stiffly, "has your Majesty seen
aught of a noble Scarecrow? And could your Supreme Fixity tell us
aught--"

The King's eyes opened. "You're out of turn," he interrupted crossly.
"We're only to the second question. How will you spend the night?"

"In sleep," answered Sir Hokus promptly, "if your Majesty permits."

"I do," said the King solemnly. "That gets me out of entertaining.
Early to bed and late to rise, that's my motto. Next! It's your
turn," he added irritably as Sir Hokus did not immediately answer.

"Have you seen aught of the noble Scarecrow?" asked Sir Hokus, and
all of them waited anxiously for the King's reply.

"I don't know about _the_ Scarecrow. I've seen _a_ Scarecrow, and a
sensible chap he was, hanging still like a reasonable person and
letting chairs and tables chase themselves 'round."

"Where was he?" asked Sir Hokus in great agitation.

"In a picture," said the King. "Wait, I'll ring for it."

"No use," said the Knight in a disappointed voice. "We're looking for
a man."

"Would you mind telling me why you are all so still, and why all your
furniture runs around?" asked Dorothy, who was growing a little
restless.

"You forget where you are, and you're out of turn. But I'll overlook
it this once," said the King. "Have you ever noticed, Little With D,
that furniture lasts longer than people?"

"Why, yes," admitted Dorothy.

"Well, there you are!" King Fix Sit folded his hands and regarded her
complacently. "Here we manage things better. We stand still and let
the furniture run around and wear itself out. How does it strike
you?"

"It seem sensible," acknowledged Dorothy. "But don't you ever grow
tired of standing still?"

"I've heard of growing hair and flowers and corn, but never of
growing tired. What is it?" asked Sticken Plaster, leaning toward
Dorothy.

"I think she's talked enough," said the King, closing his eyes.

Sir Hokus had been staring anxiously at the King for some time. Now
he came close to the monarch's side, and standing on tiptoe whispered
hoarsely: "Hast any dragons here?"

"Did you say wagons?" asked the King, opening his eyes with a
terrible yawn.

"Dragons!" hissed the Knight.

"Never heard of 'em," said the King. The Cowardly Lion chuckled
behind his whiskers, and Sir Hokus in great confusion stepped back.

"What time is it?" demanded the King suddenly. He touched a bell, and
next minute a whole company of clocks came running down the street.
The big ones pushed the little ones, and a grandfather clock ran so
fast that it tripped over a cobblestone and fell on its face, which
cracked all the way across.

"You've plenty of time; why don't you take it?" called the King
angrily, while two clothes trees helped the clock to its feet.

"They're all different," giggled Dorothy, nudging the Cowardly Lion.
Some pointed to eight o'clock, some to nine, and others to half past
ten.

"Why shouldn't they be different?" asked Sticken haughtily. "Some run
faster than others!"

"Pass the time, please," said the King, looking hard at Dorothy.

"The lazy lump!" growled the Cowardly Lion. But Dorothy picked up the
nearest little clock and handed it to King Fix Sit.

"I thought so," yawned the King, pointing at the clock. At this,
everybody began ringing bells till Dorothy was obliged to cover her
ears. In an instant, the whole street was filled with beds, "rolling
up just as if they were taxis," laughed Dorothy to Sir Hokus. The
Knight smiled faintly, but as he had never seen a taxi, he could not
appreciate Dorothy's remark.

"Here come your beds," said the King shortly. "Tell them to take you
around the corner. I can't abide snoring."

"I don't snore, thank you," said Dorothy angrily, but the King had
stepped into his bed and drawn the curtains tight.

"We might as well go to bed, I 'spose," said the little girl. "I'm so
tired!"

The three beds were swaying restlessly in the middle of the street.
They were tall, four-post affairs with heavy chintz hangings. Dorothy
chose the blue one, and Sir Hokus lifted her up carefully and then
went off to catch his bed, which had gotten into an argument with a
lamppost. When he spoke to it sharply, it left off and came trotting
over to him. The Cowardly Lion, contrary to his usual custom, leaped
into his bed, and soon the three four-posters were walking quietly
down the street, evidently following the King's instructions.

Dorothy slipped off her shoes and dress and nestled comfortably down
among the soft covers. "Just like sleeping in a train," she thought
drowsily. "What a lot I shall have to tell the Scarecrow and Ozma
when I get home."

"Good night!" said the bed politely.

"Good night!" said Dorothy, too nearly asleep to even think it
strange for a bed to talk. "Good night!"



CHAPTER 13

DANCING BEDS AND THE ROADS THAT UNROLLED

"It must be a shipwreck," thought Dorothy, sitting up in alarm. She
seemed to be tossing about wildly.

"Time for little girls to get up," grumbled a harsh voice that seemed
to come from the pillows.

Dorothy rubbed her eyes. One of the bedposts was addressing her, and
the big four-poster itself was dancing a regular jig.

"Oh, stop!" cried Dorothy, holding on to the post to keep from
bouncing out.

"Can't you see I'm awake?"

"Well, I go off duty now, and you'll have to hurry," said the bed
sulkily. "I'm due at the lecture at nine."

"Lecture?" gasped Dorothy.

"What's so queer about that?" demanded the bed coldly. "I've got to
keep well posted, haven't I? I belong to a polished set, I do. Hurry
up, little girl, or I'll throw you out."

"I'm glad my bed doesn't talk to me in this impertinent fashion,"
thought Dorothy, slipping into her dress and combing her hair with
her side comb. "Imagine being ordered about by a bed! I wonder if Sir
Hokus is up." Parting the curtains, she jumped down, and the bed,
without even saying goodbye, took itself off.

Sir Hokus was sitting on a stile, polishing his armor with a
pillowslip he had taken from his bed, and the Cowardly Lion was lying
beside him lazily thumping his tail and making fun of the passing
furniture.

"Have you had breakfast?" asked Dorothy, joining her friends.

"We were waiting for your Ladyship," chuckled the Cowardly Lion.
"Would you mind ordering two for me, Hokus? I find one quite
insufficient."

Sir Hokus threw away the pillowslip, and talking cheerfully they
walked toward King Fix Sit's circle. The beds had been replaced by
breakfast tables, and the whole street was eating busily.

"Good morning, King," said Sir Hokus. "Four breakfasts, please."

The king rang a bell four times without looking up from his oatmeal.
Seeing that he did not wish to be disturbed, the three waited quietly
for their tables.

"In some ways," said Dorothy, contentedly munching a hot roll, "in
some ways this is a very comfortable place."

"In sooth 'tis that," mumbled Sir Hokus, his mouth full of baked
apple. As for the Cowardly Lion, he finished his two breakfasts in no
time. "And now," said Sir Hokus as the tables walked off, "let us
continue our quest. Could'st tell us the way to the Emerald City, my
good King Fix?"

"If you go, go away. And if you stay, stay away. That's my motto,"
answered King Fix shortly. "I can't have people running around here
like common furniture," he added in a grieved voice. All the Fix Its
nodded vigorously.

"Let them take their stand or their departure," said Sticken Plaster
firmly.

The King felt in his pocket and brought out three pieces of chalk.
"Go to the end of the street. Choose a place and draw your circle. In
five minutes you will find it impossible to move out of the circle,
and you will be saved all this unnecessary motion."

"But we don't want to come to a standstill," objected Dorothy.

"No, by my good sword!" spluttered the Knight, glaring around
nervously. Then, seeing the King looked displeased, he made a low
bow. "If your Highness could graciously direct us out of the city--"

"Buy a piece of road and go where it takes you," snapped the King.

Seeing no more was to be got out of him, they started down the long
street.

"I wonder what they do when it rains?" said Dorothy, looking
curiously at the solemn rows of people.

"Call for roofs, silly!" snapped a Fix, staring at her rudely. "If
you would spend your time thinking instead of walking, you'd know
more."

"Go to, and swallow a gooseberry!" roared the Knight, waving his
sword at the Fix, and Dorothy, fearing an encounter, begged him to
come on, which he did--though with many backward glances.

Fix City seemed to consist of one long street, and they had soon come
to the very end.

"Uds daggers!" gasped Sir Hokus.

"Great palm trees," roared the Cowardly Lion.

As for Dorothy, she could do nothing but stare. The street ended
surely enough, and beyond there was nothing at all. That is, nothing
but air.

"Well," said the Cowardly Lion, backing a few paces, "this is a
pretty fix."

"Glad you like it," said a wheezy voice. The three travelers turned
in surprise. A huge Fix was regarding them with interest. His circle,
which was the last in the row, was about twenty times as large as the
other circles, and on the edge stood a big sign:'

"Don't you remember, the King said something about buying a road,"
said Dorothy in an excited undertone to the Knight.

"Can'st direct us to a road, my good man?" asked Sir Hokus with a
bow. The Fix jerked his thumb back at the sign. "What kind of a road
to you want?" he asked hoarsely.

"A road that will take us back to the Emerald City, please," said
Dorothy.

"I can't guarantee anything like that," declared the Fix, shaking his
head.

"Our roads go where they please, and you'll have to go where they
take you. Do you want to go on or off?"

"On," shivered the Cowardly Lion, looking with a shudder over the
precipice at the end of the street.

"What kind of a road will you have? Make up your minds, please. I am
busy."

"What kind of roads have you?" asked Dorothy timidly. It was her
first experience at buying roads, and she felt a bit perplexed.

"Sunny, shady, straight, crooked, and cross-roads," snapped the Fix.

"We wouldn't want a cross one," said Dorothy positively. "Have you
any with trees at both sides and water at the end?"

"How many yards?" asked the Fix, taking a pair of shears as large as
himself off a long counter beside him.

"Five miles," said Sir Hokus as Dorothy looked confused. "That ought
to take us somewhere!"

The Fix rang one of the bells in the counter. The next minute, a big
trap door in the ground opened, and a perfectly huge roll bounced out
at his feet.

"Get on," commanded the Fix in such a sharp tone that the three
jumped to obey. Holding fast to Sir Hokus, Dorothy stepped on the
piece of road that had already unrolled. The Cowardly Lion, looking
very anxious, followed. No sooner had they done so than the road gave
a terrific leap forward that stretched the three flat upon their
backs and started unwinding from its spool at a terrifying speed.
As it unrolled, tall trees snapped erect on each side and began
laughing derisively at the three travelers huddled together in the
middle.

"G-g-glad we only took five miles," stuttered Dorothy to the Knight,
whose armor was rattling like a Ford.

The Cowardly Lion had wound his tail around a tree and dug his claws
into the road, for he had no intention of falling off into
nothingness. As for the road, it snapped along at about a mile a
minute, and before they had time to grow accustomed to this singular
mode of travel, it gave a final jump that sent them circling into the
air, and began rapidly winding itself up.

Down, down, down whirled Dorothy, falling with a resounding splash
into a broad stream of water. Then down, down, down again, almost to
the bottom.

"Help!" screamed Dorothy as her head rose above water, and she began
striking out feebly. But the fall through the air had taken all her
breath.

"What do you want?" A thin, neat little man was watching her
anxiously from the bank, making careful notes in a book that he held
in one hand.

"Help! Save me!" choked Dorothy, feeling herself going down in the
muddy stream again.

"Wait! I'll look it up under the 'H's," called the little man, making
a trumpet of his hands. "Are you an island? An island is a body of
land entirely surrounded by water, but this seems to be a some-body,"
Dorothy heard him mutter as he whipped over several pages of his
book. "Sorry," he called back, shaking his head slowly, "but this is
the wrong day. I only save lives on Monday."

"Stand aside, Mem, you villain!" A second little man exactly like the
first except that he was exceedingly untidy plunged into the stream.

"It's no use," thought Dorothy, closing her eyes, for he had jumped
in far below the spot where she had fallen and was making no progress
whatever. The waters rushed over her head the second time. Then she
felt herself being dragged upward.

When she opened her eyes, the Cowardly Lion was standing over her.
"Are you all right?" he rumbled anxiously. "I came as soon as I
could. Fell in way upstream. Seen Hokus?"

"Oh, he'll drown," cried Dorothy, forgetting her own narrow escape.
"He can't swim in that heavy armor!"

"Never fear, I'll get him," puffed the Cowardly Lion, and without
waiting to catch his breath he plunged back into the stream. The
little man who only saved lives on Monday now approached timidly.
"I'd like to get a statement from you, if you don't mind. It might
help me in the future."

"You might have helped me in the present," said Dorothy, wringing out
her dress. "You ought to be ashamed of yourself."

"I'll make a note of that," said the little man earnestly. "But how
did you feel when you went down?" He waited, his pencil poised over
the little book.

"Go away," cried Dorothy in disgust.

"But my dear young lady--"

"I'm not your dear young lady. Oh, dear, why doesn't the Cowardly
Lion come back?"

"Go away, Mem." The second little man, dripping wet, came up
hurriedly.

"I was only trying to get a little information," grumbled Mem
sulkily.

"I'm sorry I couldn't swim faster," said the wet little man,
approaching Dorothy apologetically.

"Well, thank you for trying," said Dorothy. "Is he your brother? And
could you tell me where you are? You're dressed in yellow, so I
'spose it must be somewhere in the Winkie Country."

"Right in both cases," chuckled the little fellow. "My name is Ran
and his name is Memo." He jerked his thumb at the retiring twin.
"Randum and Memo--see?"

"I think I do," said Dorothy, half closing her eyes. "Is that why
he's always taking notes?"

"Exactly," said Ran. "I do everything at Random, and he does
everything at memorandum."

"It must be rather confusing," said Dorothy. Then as she caught sight
of the Cowardly Lion dragging Sir Hokus, she jumped up excitedly.
Ran, however, took one look at the huge beast and then fled, calling
for Mem at the top of his voice. And that is the last Dorothy saw of
these singular twins.

The Lion dropped Sir Hokus in a limp heap. When Dorothy unfastened
his armor, gallons of water rushed out.

"Sho good of--of--you," choked the poor Knight, trying to straighten
up.

"Save your breath, old fellow," said the Cowardly Lion, regarding him
affectionately.

"Oh, why did I ask for water on the end of the road?" sighed Dorothy.
"But, anyway, we're in some part of the Winkie Country."

Sir Hokus, though still spluttering, was beginning to revive. "Yon
noble bheast shall be knighted. Uds daggers! That's the shecond time
he's shaved my life!" Rising unsteadily, he tottered over to the Lion
and struck him a sharp blow on the shoulder. "Rishe, Shir Cowardly
Lion," he cried hoarsely, and fell headlong, and before Dorothy or
the lion had recovered from their surprise he was fast asleep,
mumbling happily of dragons and bludgeons.

"We'll have to wait till he gets rested," said Dorothy. "And until I
get dry." She began running up and down, then stopped suddenly before
the Lion.

"And there's something else for Professor Wogglebug to put in his
book, Sir Cowardly Lion."

"Oh, that!" mumbled the Cowardly Lion, looking terribly embarrassed.
"Whoever heard of a Cowardly Knight? Nonsense!"

"No, it isn't nonsense," said Dorothy stoutly. "You're a knight from
now on. Won't the Scarecrow be pleased?"

"If we ever find him," sighed the Lion, settling himself beside Sir
Hokus.

"We will," said Dorothy gaily. "I just feel it."



CHAPTER 14

SONS AND GRANDSONS GREET THE SCARECROW

Although the Scarecrow had been on Silver Island only a few days, he
had already instituted many reforms, and thanks to his cleverness the
people were more prosperous than ever before. Cheers greeted him
wherever he went, and even old Chew Chew was more agreeable and no
longer made bitter remarks to Happy Toko. The Scarecrow himself,
however, had four new wrinkles and was exceedingly melancholy. He
missed the carefree life in Oz, and every minute that he was not
ruling the island he was thinking about his old home and dear, jolly
comrades in the Emerald City.

"I almost hope they will look in the Magic Picture and wish me back
again," he mused pensively. "But it is my duty to stay here. I have a
family to support." So he resolved to put the best face he could on
the matter, and Happy Toko did his utmost to cheer up his royal
master. The second morning after the great victory, he came running
into the silver throne room in a great state of excitement.

"The honorable Offspring have arriven!" announced Happy, turning a
somersault. "Come, ancient and amiable Sir, and gaze upon your sons
and grandsons!" The Scarecrow sprang joyously from his silver throne,
upsetting a bowl of silver fish and three silver vases. At last a
real family! Ever since his arrival, the three Princes and their
fifteen little sons had been cruising on the royal pleasure barge, so
that the Scarecrow had not caught a glimpse of them.

"This is the happiest moment of my life!" he exclaimed, clasping his
yellow gloves and watching the door intently. Happy looked a little
uneasy, for he knew the three Princes to be exceedingly haughty and
overbearing, but he said nothing, and next minute the Scarecrow's
family stepped solemnly into the royal presence.

"Children!" cried the Scarecrow, and with his usual impetuousness
rushed forward and flung his arms around the first richly clad
Prince.

"Take care! Take care, ancient and honorable papa!" cried the young
Silverman, backing away. "Such excitement is not good for one of your
advanced years." He drew himself away firmly and, adjusting a huge
pair of silver spectacles, regarded the Scarecrow attentively. "Ah,
how you have changed!"

"He looks very feeble, Too Fang, but may he live long to rule this
flowery island and our humble selves!" said the second Prince, bowing
stiffly.

"Do you not find the affairs of state fatiguing, darling papa?"
inquired the third Prince, fingering a jeweled chain that hung around
his neck.

"I, as your eldest son, shall be delighted to relieve you should you
wish to retire. Get back ten paces, you!" he roared at Happy Toko.

The poor Scarecrow had been so taken aback by this cool reception
that he just stared in disbelief.

"If the three honorable Princes will retire themselves, I will speak
with my grandsons," he said dryly, bowing in his most royal manner.
The three Princes exchanged startled glances. Then, with three low
salaams, they retired backward from the hall.

"And now, my dears--!" The Scarecrow looked wistfully at his fifteen
silken-clad little grandsons. Their silver hair, plaited tightly
into little queues, stood out stiffly on each side of their heads and
gave them a very curious appearance. At his first word, the fifteen
fell dutifully on their noses. As soon as they were right side up,
the Scarecrow, beginning at the end of the row, addressed a joking
question to each in his most approved Oz style. But over they went
again, and answered merely:

"Yes, gracious Grand-papapapah!" or "No honorable Grandpapapapah!"
And the constant bobbing up and down and papahing so confused the
poor Scarecrow that he nearly gave up the conversation.

"It's no use trying to talk to these children," he wailed in disgust,
"they're so solemn. Don't you ever laugh?" he cried in exasperation,
for he had told them stories that would have sent the Oz youngsters
into hysterics.

"It is not permissible for a Prince to laugh at the remarks of his
honorable grandparent," whispered Happy Toko, while the fifteen
little Princes banged their heads solemnly on the floor.

"Honorable fiddlesticks!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, slumping back on
his throne. "Bring cushions." Happy Toko ran off nimbly, and soon the
fifteen little Princes were seated in a circle at the Scarecrow's
feet. "To prevent prostrations," said the Scarecrow.

"Yes, old Grandpapapapapah!" chorused the Princes, bending over as
far as they could.

"Wait!" said the Scarecrow hastily, "I'll tell you a story. Once upon
a time, to a beautiful country called Oz, which is surrounded on all
sides by a deadly desert, there came a little girl named Dorothy. A
terrible gale--Well, what's the matter now?" The Scarecrow stopped
short, for the oldest Prince had jerked a book out of his sleeve and
was flipping over the pages industriously.

"It is not on the map, great Grand papapapah," he announced solemnly,
and all of the other little Princes shook their heads and said dully,
"Not on the map."

"Not on the map--Oz? Of course it's not. Do you suppose we want all
the humans in creation coming there?" Calming down, the Scarecrow
tried to continue his story, but every time he mentioned Oz, the
little Princes shook their heads stubbornly and whispered, "Not on
the map," till the usually good-tempered Scarecrow flew into perfect
passion.

"Not on the map, you little villains!" he screamed, forgetting they
were his grandsons. "What difference does that make? Are your heads
solid silver?"

"We do not believe in Oz," announced the oldest Prince serenely.
"There is no such place."

"No such place as Oz--Happy, do you hear that?" The Scarecrow's voice
fairly crackled with indignation. "Why, I thought everybody believed
in Oz!"

"Perhaps your Highness can convince them later," suggested the
Imperial Punster. "This way, offspring." His Master, he felt, had had
enough family for one day. So the fifteen little Princes, with
fifteen stiff little bows, took themselves back to the royal nursery.
As for the Scarecrow, he paced disconsolately up and down his
magnificent throne room, tripping over his kimona at every other
step.

"You're a good boy, Tappy," said the Scarecrow as Happy returned,
"but I tell you being a grandparent is not what I thought it would
be. Did you hear them tell me right to my face they did not believe
in Oz? And my sons--ugh!"

"Fault of their bringing up," said Happy Toko comfortingly. "If your
serene Highness would just tell me more of that illustrious country!"
Happy knew that nothing cheered the Scarecrow like talking of Oz, and
to tell the truth Happy himself never tired of the Scarecrow's
marvelous stories. So the two slipped quietly into the palace
gardens, and the Scarecrow related for the fourteenth time the story
of his discovery by Dorothy and the story of Ozma, and almost forgot
that he was an Emperor.

"Your Highness knows the history of Oz by heart," said Happy
admiringly as the Scarecrow paused.

"I couldn't do that," said the Scarecrow gently, "for you see, Happy,
I have no heart."

"Then I wish we all had none!" exclaimed Happy Toko, rolling up his
eyes. The Scarecrow looked embarrassed, so the little Punster threw
back his head and sang a song he had been making up while the
Scarecrow had been telling his stories:

      The Scarecrow was standing alone in a field,
      Inviting the crows to keep off,
      When the straw in his chest began tickling his vest
      And he couldn't resist a loud cough.

      The noise that was heard so surprised ev'ry bird,
      that the flock flew away in a fright,
      But the Scarecrow looked pleased, and he said "If I'd sneezed
      It wouldn't have been so polite."

"Ho!" roared the Scarecrow, "You're almost as good at making verses
as Scraps, Write that down for me, Tappy. I'd like to show it to
her."

"Hush!" whispered Happy, holding up his finger warningly. The
Scarecrow turned so suddenly that the silver pigtail pinned to the
back of his hat wound itself tightly around his neck. No wonder! On
the other side of the hedge the three Princes were walking up and
down, conversing in indignant whispers.

"What a horrible shape our honorable Papa has reappeared in. I hear
that it never wears out," muttered one. "He may continue just as he
is for years and years. How am I ever to succeed him, I'd like to
know. Why, he may outlive us all!"

"We might throw him into the silver river," said the second
hopefully.

"No use," choked the third. "I was just talking to the Imperial
Soothsayer, and he tells me that no one from this miserable Kingdom
of Oz can be destroyed. But I have a plan. Incline your Royal ears--
listen." The voices dropped to such a low whisper that neither Happy
nor the Scarecrow could hear one word.

"Treason!" spluttered Happy, making ready to spring through the
hedge, but the Scarecrow seized him by the arm and drew him away.

"I don't believe they like their poor papa," exclaimed the Scarecrow
when they were safely back in the throne room. "I'm feeling older
than a Kinkajou. Ah, Happy Oko, why did I ever slide down my family
tree? It has brought me nothing but unhappiness."



CHAPTER 15

THE THREE PRINCES PLOT TO UNDO THE EMPEROR

"Let me help your Imperial Serenity!"

"Bring a cane!"

"Carefully, now!"

The three royal Princes, with every show of affection, were
supporting the Scarecrow to the silver bench in the garden where he
usually sat during luncheon.

"Are you quite comfortable?" asked the elder. "Here, Happy, you
rogue, fetch a scarf for his Imperial Highness. You must be careful,
dear Papa Scarecrow. At your age, drafts are dangerous." The rascally
Prince wound the scarf about the Scarecrow's neck.

"What do you suppose they are up to?" asked the Scarecrow, staring
after the three suspiciously. "Why this sudden devotion? It upsets my
Imperial Serenity a lot."

"Trying to make you feel old," grumbled Happy. Several hours had
passed since they had overheard the conversation in the garden. The
Scarecrow had decided to watch his sons closely and fall in with any
plan they suggested so they would suspect nothing. Then, when the
time came, he would act. Just what he would do he did not know, but
his excellent brains would not, he felt sure, desert him. Happy Toko
sat as close to the Scarecrow as he could and scowled terribly
whenever the Princes approached, which was every minute or so during
the afternoon.

"How is the Scarecrow's celestial old head?"

"Does he suffer from honorable gout?"

"Should they fetch the Imperial Doctor?"

The Scarecrow, who had never thought of age in his whole straw life,
became extremely nervous.

Was he really old? Did his head ache? When no one was looking, he
felt himself carefully all over. Then something of his old time Oz
spirit returned. Seizing the cushion that his eldest son was placing
at his back, he hurled it over his head. Leaping from his throne, he
began turning handsprings in a careless and sprightly manner.

"Don't you worry about your honorable old papa," chuckled the
Scarecrow, winking at Happy Toko. "He's good for a couple of
centuries!"

The three Princes stared sourly at this exhibition of youth.

"But your heart," objected the eldest Prince.

"Have none," laughed the Scarecrow. Snatching off the silver cord
from around his waist, he began skipping rope up and down the hall.
The Princes, tapping their foreheads significantly, retired, and the
Scarecrow, throwing his arm around Happy Toko, began whispering in
his ear. He had a plan himself. They would see!

* * * * *

Meanwhile, off in his dark cave in one of the silver mountains, the
Grand Gheewizard of the Silver Island was stirring a huge kettle of
magic. Every few moments he paused to read out of a great yellow book
that he had propped up on the mantle. The fire in the huge grate
leaped fiercely under the big, black pot, and the sputtering candles
on each side of the book sent creepy shadows into the dark cave. Dark
chests, books, bundles of herbs, and heaps of gold and silver were
everywhere. Whenever the Gheewizard turned his back, a rheumatic
silver-scaled old dragon would crawl toward the fire and swallow a
mouthful of coals, until the old Gheewizard caught him in the act and
chained him to a ring in the corner of the cave.

"Be patient, little joy of my heart! Our fortune is about to be
made," hissed the wizened little man, waving a long iron spoon at the
dragon. "You shall have a bucket of red-hot coals every hour and I a
silver cap with a tassel. Have not the Royal Princes promised it?"
The dragon shuffled about and finally went to sleep, smoking sulkily.

"Is it finished, son of a yellow dog?" Through the narrow opening of
the cave, the youngest Prince stuck his head.

"I am working as fast as I can, Honorable Prince, but the elixir must
boil yet one more night. Tomorrow, when the sun shines on the first
bar of your celestial window, come, and all will be ready."

"Are you sure you have found it?" asked the Prince, withdrawing his
head, for the smoking dragon and steam from the kettle made him
cough.

"Quite sure," wheezed the Grand Gheewizard, and fell to stirring the
kettle with all his might.

* * * * *

The Scarecrow, although busy with trials in the great courtroom of
the palace, felt that something unusual was in the air. The Princes
kept nodding to one another, and the Grand Chew Chew and General
Mugwump had their heads together at every opportunity.


"Something's going to happen, Tappy. I feel it in my straw,"
whispered the Scarecrow as he finished trying the last case. At that
very minute, the Grand Chew Chew arose and held up his hand for
silence. Everybody paused in their way to the exits and looked with
surprise at the old Silverman.

"I have to announce," said the Grand Chew Chew in a solemn voice,
"that the Great and Imperial Chang Wang Woe will tomorrow be restored
to his own rightful shape. The Grand Gheewizard of the realm has
discovered a magic formula to break the enchantment and free him from
this distressing Scarecrow body. Behold for the last the Scarecrow of
Oz. Tomorrow he will be our old and glorious Emperor!"

"Old and glorious?" gasped the Scarecrow, nearly falling from his
throne.

"Tappy! I forgot to lock up the wizards. Great Cornstarch! Tomorrow I
will be eighty-five years old."

Such cheers greeted the Grand Chew Chew's announcement that no one
even noticed the Scarecrow's distress.

"I, also, have an announcement!" cried the eldest Prince, standing up
proudly. "To make the celebration of my royal Papa's restoration
complete, we have chosen the lovely and charming Orange Blossom for
his bride."

"Bride!" gulped the Scarecrow. "But I do not approve of second
marriages. I refuse to--"

No one paid the slightest attention to the Scarecrow's remarks.

"Hold my hand, Tappy," sighed the Scarecrow weakly. "It may be your
last chance." Then he sat up and stared in good earnest, for the
Prince was leading forward a tall, richly clad lady.

"Orange Blossom!" muttered the Scarecrow under his breath. "He means
Lemon Peel! Silver grandmother, Tappy!" Orange Blossom was a
cross-looking Princess of seventy-five, at least.

"She is a sister of the King of the Golden Islands," whispered
General Mugwump. "Of a richness surpassing your own. Let me
felicitate your Highness."

"Fan me, Tappy! Fan me!" gasped the Scarecrow. Then he straightened
himself suddenly. The time had come for action. He would say nothing
to anyone, but that night he would escape and try to find his way
back to Oz, family or no family! He bowed graciously to Princess
Orange Blossom, to the Grand Chew Chew, and to his sons.

"Let everything be made ready for the ceremony, and may tomorrow
indeed bring me to myself," he repeated solemnly. Nothing was talked
of that evening but the Emperor's impending marriage and the Grand
Gheewizard's discovery. The Scarecrow seemed the least excited person
in the palace. Sitting on his throne, he pretended to read the Royal
Silver Journal, but he was really waiting impatiently for the
courtiers to retire. Finally, when the last one had bowed himself out
and only Happy Toko remained in the throne room, the Scarecrow began
making his plans.

"It's no use, Tappy," said he, tying up a few little trinkets for
Dorothy in a silk handkerchief, "I'd rather be straw than meat. I'd
rather be a plain Scarecrow in Oz than Emperor of the Earth! They may
be my sons, but all they want is my death. I'm going back to my old
friends. I'd rather--". He got no farther. A huge slave seized him
suddenly from behind, while another caught Happy Toko around his fat
little waist.

"Tie them fast," said the eldest Prince, smiling wickedly at the
Scarecrow. "Here, tie him to the beanstalk. Merely a part of the
Grand Gheewizard's formula," he exclaimed maliciously as the
struggling Scarecrow was bound securely to his family tree. "Good
night, dear papa Scarecrow. Tomorrow you will be your old self again,
and in a few short years _I_ will be Emperor of the Silver Islands!"

"This rather upsets our plans, eh Tappy?" wheezed the Scarecrow after
a struggle with his bonds.

"Pigs! Weasels!" choked Tappy. "What are we to do?"

"Alas!" groaned the Scarecrow. "Tomorrow there will be no Scarecrow
in Oz. What will Dorothy and Ozma think? And once I am changed into
my old Imperial self, I can never make the journey to the Emerald
City. Eighty-six is too old for traveling."

"Has your Majesty forgotten the wonderful brains given to you by the
Wizard of Oz?"

"I had--for a moment," confessed the Scarecrow. "Be quiet, Tappy,
while I think." Pressing his head against the magic beanpole, the
Scarecrow thought and thought, harder than he had ever done in the
course of his adventurous life, and in the great, silent hall Happy
Toko struggled to set himself free.



CHAPTER 16

DOROTHY AND HER GUARDIANS MEET NEW FRIENDS

While all these exciting things were happening to the poor Scarecrow,
Dorothy, Sir Hokus and the Cowardly Lion had been having adventures
of their own. For three days, they had wandered through a deserted
part of the Winkie Country, subsisting largely on berries, sleeping
under trees, and looking in vain for a road to lead them back to the
Emerald City. On the second day, they had encountered an ancient
woodsman, too old and deaf to give them any information. He did,
however, invite them into his hut and give them a good dinner and a
dozen sandwiches to carry away with them.

"But, oh, for a good old pasty!" sighed Sir Hokus late on the third
afternoon as they finished the last of the crumbly sandwiches.

"Do you know," said Dorothy, looking through the straggly fields and
woods ahead, "I believe we've been going in the wrong direction
again."

"Again!" choked the Cowardly Lion. "You mean still. I've been in a
good many parts of Oz, but this--this is the worst."

"Not even one little dragon!" Sir Hokus shook his head mournfully.
Then, seeing that Dorothy was tired and discouraged, he pretended to
strum on a guitar and sang in his high-pitched voice:

      A rusty Knight in steel bedite
      And Lady Dot, so fair,
      Sir Lion bold, with mane of gold
      And might besides to spa--ha--hare!
      And might beside to spare!
      The dauntless three, a company
      Of wit and bravery are,
      Who seek the valiant Scarecrow man,
      Who seek him near and fa--har--har,
      Who seek him near and fa--har!

"Oh, I like that!" cried Dorothy, jumping up and giving Sir Hokus a
little squeeze. "Only you should have said trusty Knight."

The Cowardly Lion shook his golden mane. "Let's do a little
reconnoitering, Hokus," he said carelessly. He felt he must live up
to the song somehow. "Perhaps we'll find a sign."

"I don't believe in signs anymore," laughed Dorothy, "but I'm coming
too." Sir Hokus' song had cheered them all, and it wasn't the first
time the Knight had helped make the best of a tiresome journey.

"The air seemeth to grow very hot," observed Sir Hokus after they had
walked along silently for a time. "Hast noticed it, Sir Cowardly?"

"No, but I've swallowed some of it," coughed the Cowardly Lion,
looking suspiciously through the trees.

"I'll just step forward and see what it is," said the Knight. As he
disappeared, the truth dawned on Dorothy.

"Wait! Wait! Don't go! Please, please, Sir Hokus, come back, come
back!" cried the little girl, running after him as fast as she could.

"What's the matter?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion, thudding behind her.
Then both, coming suddenly out of the woods, gave a terrible scream,
which so startled Sir Hokus that he fell over backwards. Just in
time, too, for another step would have taken him straight on to the
Deadly Desert, which destroys every living thing and keeps all
intruders away from Oz.

"What befell?" puffed Sir Hokus, getting to his feet. Naturally, he
knew nothing of the poisonous sands.

"You did," wheezed the Cowardly Lion in an agitated voice.

"Was it a dragon?" asked the Knight, limping toward them hopefully.

"Sit down!" The Cowardly Lion mopped his brow with his tail. "One
step on that desert and it would have been one long goodnight."

"I should say it would!" shuddered Dorothy, and explained to Sir
Hokus the deadly nature of the sands. "And do you know what this
means?" Dorothy was nearer to tears than even I like to think about.
"It means we've come in exactly the wrong direction and are farther
away from the Emerald City than we were when we started."

"And seek him near and fa--hah--har," mumbled Sir Hokus with a very
troubled light in his kindly blue eyes.

"And seek him near and far."

"Fah--har--har! I should say it was," said the Cowardly Lion
bitterly. "But you needn't sing it."

"No, I s'pose not. Uds helmets and hauberks! I s'pose not!" The
Knight lapsed into a discouraged silence, and all three sat and
stared drearily at the stretch of desert before them and thought
gloomily of the rough country behind.

"It's a caravan," wheezed a hoarse voice.

"I doubt that, Camy, I doubt it very much." The shrill nasal voices
so startled the three travelers that they swung about in
astonishment.

"Great dates and deserts!" burst out the Cowardly Lion, jumping up.
And on the whole, this exclamation was entirely suitable, for ambling
toward them were a long-legged camel and a wobbly-necked dromedary.

"At last! A steed!" cried the Knight, bounding to his feet.

"I doubt that." The dromedary stopped and looked at him coldly.

"Try me," said the camel amiably. "I'm more comfortable."

"I doubt that, too."

      "The doubtful dromedary wept,
      As o'er the desert sands he stept,
      Association with the sphinx
      Has made him doubtful, so he thinks!"

chortled the Knight with his head on one side.

"How did you know?" asked the Dromedary, opening his eyes wide.

"It just occurred to me," admitted Sir Hokus, clearing his throat
modestly.

"I doubt that. Somebody told you," said the Doubtful Dromedary
bitterly.

"Pon my honor," said Sir Hokus.

"I doubt it, I doubt it very much," persisted the Dromedary, wagging
his head sorrowfully.

"You seem to doubt everything!" Dorothy laughed in spite of herself,
and the Dromedary regarded her sulkily.

"He does," said the Camel. "It makes him very doubtful company. Now,
I like to be comfortable and happy, and you can't be if you're always
doubting things and people and places. Eh, my dear?"

"Where did you comfortable and doubtful parties come from?" asked the
Cowardly Lion. "Strangers here?"

"Well, yes," admitted the Camel, nibbling the branch of a tree.
"There was a terrific sandstorm, and after blowing and blowing and
blowing, we found ourselves in this little wood. The odd part of it
is that you talk in our language. Never knew a two-leg to understand
a word of Camelia before."

"You're not talking Camelia, you're talking Ozish," laughed Dorothy.
"All animals can talk here."

"Well, now, that's very comfortable, I must say," sighed the Camel,
"and if you'd just tell me where to go, it would be more comfortable
still."

"I doubt that," snapped the Dromedary. "They're no caravan."

"Where do you want to go?" asked the Cowardly Lion, ignoring the
Doubtful Dromedary.

"Anywhere, just so we keep moving. We're used to being told when to
start and stop, and life is mighty lonely without our Karwan Bashi,"
sighed the Comfortable Camel.

"Why, I didn't know you smoked!" exclaimed Dorothy in surprise. She
thought the camel was referring to a brand of tobacco.

"He means his camel driver," whispered Sir Hokus, eyeing the soft,
pillowed seat on the camel's back longingly. Besides the seat, great
sacks and bales of goods hung from its sides. The Doubtful Dromedary
was similarly loaded.

"Goodness!" exclaimed Dorothy. A sudden idea had struck her. "You
haven't anything to eat in those sacks, have you?"

"Plenty, my child--plenty!" answered the Camel calmly.

"Three cheers for the Comfortable Camel!" roared the Cowardly Lion,
while Sir Hokus, following the camel's directions, carefully
unfastened a large, woven basket from one of the sacks on its side.

"You may be my Karwan Bashi," announced the Comfortable Camel
judiciously as Sir Hokus paused for breath.

"Hear that, Lady Dot?" Sir Hokus swept the camel a bow and fairly
beamed with pleasure. Dorothy, meanwhile, had set out an appetizing
repast on a small, rocky ledge--a regular feast, it appeared to the
hungry travelers. There were loaves of black bread, figs, dates,
cheese, and a curious sort of dried meat which the Cowardly Lion
swallowed in great quantities.

"Isn't this cozy?" said Dorothy, forgetting the long, weary way
ahead. "My, I'm glad we met you!"

"Very comforting to us, too, my dear," said the Camel, swaying
complacently. "Isn't it, Doubty?"

"There are some silk cushions in my right-hand saddle sack, but I
doubt very much whether you'll like 'em," mumbled the Dromedary
gruffly.

"Out with them!" cried Sir Hokus, pouncing on the Doubtful Dromedary,
and in a minute each of the party had a cushion and was as snug as
possible.

"Could anything have been more fortunate?" exulted the Knight. "We
can now resume our journey properly mounted."

"I think I'll ride the Cowardly Lion," said Dorothy, looking uneasily
at the high seat on the camel's back. "Let's start before it grows
any darker."

They had eaten to heart's content, and now, packing up the remainder
of the feast, the little party made ready to start.

Sir Hokus, using the Cowardly Lion as a footstool, mounted the camel,
and then Dorothy climbed on her old friend's back, and the little
caravan moved slowly through the forest.

"There's a tent in my left-hand saddle sack, but I doubt very much
whether you can put it up," said the Doubtful Dromedary, falling in
behind the Comfortable Camel. "I doubt it very much indeed."

"How now, what means this doubting?" called Sir Hokus from his
perilous seat. "I'll pitch it when the time comes."

"Mind you don't pitch out when the Camel goes!" called the Cowardly
Lion, who would have his little joke. Sir Hokus, to tell the truth,
was feeling tossed about and dizzy, but he was too polite to mention
the fact. As they proceeded, Dorothy told the Comfortable Camel all
about the Scarecrow and Oz.

An occasional word jolted down from above told her that the Knight
was singing. They had gone possibly a mile when Dorothy pointed in
excitement to a road just ahead.

"We must have missed it before! Wait, I'll see what it's like."
Jumping down from the Cowardly Lion's back, she peered curiously at
the narrow, tree-lined path. "Why, here's a sign!"

"What of?" asked the Comfortable Camel, lurching forward eagerly and
nearly unseating the Knight.

      W I S H   W A Y

read Dorothy in a puzzled voice.

"Looks like a pretty good road," said the Comfortable Camel,
squinting up its eyes.

"I doubt it, Camy, I doubt it very much," said the Doubtful Dromedary
tremulously.

"What does my dear Karwan Bashi think?" asked the Comfortable Camel,
looking adoringly back at the Knight.

"It is unwise to go back when the journey lieth forward," said the
Knight, and immediately returned to his song. So, single file, the
little company turned in at the narrow path, the Comfortable Camel
advancing with timid steps and the Doubtful Dromedary bobbing his
head dubiously.



CHAPTER 17

DOUBTY AND CAMY VANISH INTO SPACE

For a short time, everything went well. Then Dorothy, turning to see
how Sir Hokus was getting along, discovered that the Doubtful
Dromedary had disappeared.

"Why, where in the world?" exclaimed Dorothy. The Comfortable Camel
craned his wobbly neck and, when he saw that his friend was gone,
burst into tears. His sobs heaved Sir Hokus clear out of his seat and
flung him, helmet first, into the dust.

"Go to!" exploded the Knight, sitting up. "If I were a bird, riding
in yon nest would be easier." The last of his sentence ended in a
hoarse croak. Sir Hokus vanished, and a great raven flopped down in
the center of the road.

"Oh, where is my dear Karwan Bashi? Oh, where is Doubty?" screamed
the Comfortable Camel, running around in frenzied circles. "I wish
I'd never come on this path!"

"Magic!" gasped Dorothy, clutching the Cowardly Lion's mane. The
Comfortable Camel had melted into air before their very eyes.

"I doubt it, I doubt it very much!" coughed a faint voice close to
her ear. Dorothy ducked her head involuntarily as a big yellow
butterfly settled on the Cowardly Lion's ear.

"Our doubtful friend," whispered the lion weakly. "Oh, be careful,
Dorothy dear. We may turn into frogs or something worse any minute."

Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion had had experiences with magic
transformations, and the little girl, pressing her fingers to her
eyes, tried to think of something to do. The raven was making awkward
attempts to fly and cawing "Go to, now!" every other second.

"Oh, I wish dear Sir Hokus were himself again," wailed Dorothy after
trying in vain to recall some magic sentences. Presto! The Knight
stood before them, a bit breathless from flying, but hearty as ever.

"I see! I see!" said the Cowardly Lion with a little prance. "Every
wish you make on this road comes true. Remember the sign: 'Wish Way.'
I wish the Comfortable Camel were back. I wish the Doubtful Dromedary
were himself again," muttered the Cowardly Lion rapidly, and in an
instant the two creatures were standing in the path.

"Uds bodikins! So I did wish myself a bird!" gasped the Knight,
rubbing his gauntlets together excitedly.

"There you are! There you are!" cried the Comfortable Camel,
stumbling toward him and resting his foolish head on his shoulder.
"Dear, dear Karwan Bashi! And Doubty, old fellow, there you are too!
Ah, how comfortable this all is."

"Not two--one," wheezed the Doubtful Dromedary. "And Camy, I doubt
very much whether I'd care for butterflying. I just happened to wish
myself one!"

"Don't make any more wishes," said the Cowardly Lion sternly.

"Methinks a proper wish might serve us well," observed Sir Hokus. He
had been pacing up and down in great excitement. "Why not wish--"

"Oh, stop!" begged Dorothy. "Wait till we've thought it all out.
Wishing's awfully particular work!"

"One person better speak for the party," said the Cowardly Lion.
"Now, I suggest--"

"Oh, be careful!" screamed Dorothy again. "I wish you would all stop
wishing!" Sir Hokus looked at her reproachfully. No wonder. At
Dorothy's words, they all found themselves unable to speak. The
Doubtful Dromedary's eyes grew rounder and rounder. For the first
time in its life, it was unable to doubt anything.

"Now I'll have to do it all," thought Dorothy, and closing her eyes
she tried to think of the very best wish for everybody concerned. It
was night and growing darker. The Cowardly Lion, the Camel and
Dromedary and Sir Hokus peered anxiously at the little girl,
wondering what in the world was going to happen. Being wished around
is no joke. For five minutes Dorothy thought and thought. Then,
standing in the middle of the road, she made her wish in a clear,
distinct voice. It was not a very long wish. To be exact, it had only
eight words. Eight--short--little words! But stars! No sooner were
they out of Dorothy's mouth than the earth opened with a splintering
crash and swallowed up the whole company!



CHAPTER 18

DOROTHY FINDS THE SCARECROW!

The next thing Dorothy knew, she was sitting on the hard floor of a
great, dark hall. One lantern burned feebly, and in the dim, silvery
light she could just make out the Comfortable Camel scrambling
awkwardly to his feet.

"I smell straw," sniffed the Camel softly.

"I doubt very much whether I am going to like this place." The voice
of the Doubtful Dromedary came hesitatingly through the gloom.

"By sword and scepter!" gasped the Knight, "Are you there, Sir
Cowardly?"

"Thank goodness, they are!" said Dorothy. Wishing other people about
is a risky and responsible business. "They're all here, but I wonder
where here is." She jumped up, but at a shuffle of feet drew back.

"Pigs! Weasels!" shrilled an angry voice, and a fat little man hurled
himself at Sir Hokus, who happened to have fallen in the lead.

"Uds trudgeons and bludgeons and maugre thy head!" roared the Knight,
shaking him off like a fly.

"Tappy, Tappy, my dear boy. Caution! What's all this?" At the sound
of that dear, familiar voice Dorothy's heart gave a skip of joy, and
without stopping to explain she rushed forward.

"Dorothy!" cried the Scarecrow, stepping on his kimona and falling
off his silvery throne. "Lights, Tappy! More lights, at once!" But
Tappy was too busy backing away from Sir Hokus of Pokes.

"Approach, vassal!" thundered the Knight, who under-stood not a word
of Tappy's speech. "Approach! I think I've been insulted!" He drew
his sword and glared angrily through the darkness, and Tappy, having
backed as far as possible, fell heels over pigtail into the silver
fountain. At the loud splash, Dorothy hastened to the rescue.

"They're friends, and we've found the Scarecrow, we've found the
Scarecrow!" She seized Sir Hokus and shook him till his armor
rattled.

"Tappy! Tappy!" called the Scarecrow. "Where in the world did he
pagota?" That's exactly what he said, but to Dorothy it sounded like
no language at all.

"Why," she cried in dismay, "it's the Scarecrow, but I can't
understand a word he's saying!"

"I think he must be talking Turkey," droned the Comfortable Camel,
"or donkey! I knew a donkey once, a very uncomfortable party, I--"

"I doubt it's donkey," put in the Dromedary importantly, but no one
paid any attention to the two beasts. For Happy Toko had at last
dragged himself out of the fountain and set fifteen lanterns glowing.

"Oh!" gasped Dorothy as the magnificent silver throne room was
flooded with light, "Where are we?"

The Scarecrow had picked himself up, and with outstretched arms came
running toward her talking a perfect Niagara of Silver Islandish.

"Have you forgotten your Ozish so soon?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion
reproachfully as Dorothy flung her arms around the Scarecrow. The
Scarecrow, seeing the Cowardly Lion for the first time, fairly fell
upon his neck. Then he brushed his clumsy hand across his forehead.

"Wasn't I talking Ozish?" he asked in a puzzled voice.

"Oh, now you are!" exclaimed Dorothy. And sure enough, the Scarecrow
was talking plain Ozish again. (Which I don't mind telling you is
also plain English.)

The Knight had been watching this little reunion with hardly
repressed emotion. Advancing hastily, he dropped on one knee.

"My good sword and lance are ever at thy service, my Lord Scarecrow!"
he exclaimed feelingly.

"Who is this impulsive person?" gulped the Scarecrow, staring in
undisguised astonishment at the kneeling figure of the Sir Hokus of
Pokes.

"He's my Knight Errant, and he's taken such good care of me,"
explained Dorothy eagerly.

"Splendid fellow," hissed the Cowardly Lion in the Scarecrow's other
painted ear, "if he does talk odds and ends."

"Any friend of little Dorothy's is my friend," said the Scarecrow,
shaking hands with Sir Hokus warmly. "But what I want to know is how
you all got here."

"First tell us where we are," begged the little girl, for the
Scarecrow's silver hat and queue filled her with alarm.

"You are on the Silver Island," said the Scarecrow slowly. "And I am
the Emperor--or his good-for-nothing spirit--and tomorrow," the
Scarecrow glared around wildly, "tomorrow I'll be eighty-five going
on eighty-six." His voice broke and ended in a barely controlled sob.

"Doubt that," drawled the Doubtful Dromedary sleepily.

"Eighty-five years old!" gasped Dorothy. "Why, no one in Oz grows any
older!"

"We are no longer in Oz." The Scarecrow shook his head sadly. Then,
fixing the group with a puzzled stare, he exclaimed, "But how did you
get here?"

"On a _wish_," said the Knight in a hollow voice.

"Yes," said Dorothy, "we've been hunting you all over Oz, and at last
we came to Wish Way, and I said 'I wish we were all with the
Scarecrow,' just like that--and next minute--"

"We fell and fell--and fell--and fell," wheezed the Comfortable
Camel.

"And fell--and fell--and fell--and fell," droned the Dromedary,
"And--"

"Here you are," finished the Scarecrow hastily, for the Dromedary
showed signs of going on forever.

"Now tell us every single thing that has happened to you," demanded
Dorothy eagerly.

Happy Toko had recognized Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion from the
Scarecrow's description, and he now approached with an arm full of
cushions. These he set in a circle on the floor, with one for the
Scarecrow in the center, and with a warning finger on his lips placed
himself behind his Master.

"Tappy is right!" exclaimed the Scarecrow. "We must be as quiet as
possible, for a great danger hangs over me."

Without more ado, he told them of his amazing fall down the
beanstalk; of his adventures on Silver Island; of his sons and
grandsons and the Gheewizard's elixir which would turn him from a
lively Scarecrow into an old, old Emperor. All that I have told you,
he told Dorothy, up to the very point where his eldest son had bound
him to the bean pole and tied up poor, faithful Happy Toko. Happy, it
seems, had at last managed to free himself, and they were about to
make their escape when Dorothy and her party had fallen into the
throne room. The Comfortable Camel and Doubtful Dromedary lis-tened
politely at first, but worn out by their exciting adventures, fell
asleep in the middle of the story.

Nothing could have exceeded Dorothy's dismay to learn that the jolly
Scarecrow of Oz, whom she had discovered herself, was in reality
Chang Wang Woe, Emperor of Silver Island.

"Oh, this spoils everything!" wailed the little girl. (The thought of
Oz without the Scarecrow was unthinkable.) "It spoils everything! We
were going to adopt you and be your truly family. Weren't we?"

The Cowardly Lion nodded. "I was going to be your cousin," he mumbled
in a choked voice, "but now that you have a family of your own--" The
lion miserably slunk down beside Dorothy.

Sir Hokus looked fierce and rattled his sword, but he could think of
nothing that would help them out of their trouble.

"To-morrow there won't be any Scarecrow in Oz!" wailed Dorothy. "Oh,
dear! Oh, dear!" And the little girl began to cry as if her heart
would break.

"Stop! Stop!" begged the Scarecrow, while Sir Hokus awkwardly patted
Dorothy on the back. "I'd rather have you for my family any day. I
don't care a Kinkajou for being Emperor, and as for my sons, they are
unnatural villains who make my life miserable by telling me how old I
am!"

"Just like a poem I once read," said Dorothy, brightening up:

      "You are old, Father William," the young man said,
      "And your hair has become very white,
      And yet you incessantly stand on your head!
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?"

"That's it, that's it exactly!" exclaimed the Scarecrow as Dorothy
finished repeating the verse. "'You are old, Father Scarecrow!'
That's all I hear. I did stand on my head, too. And Dorothy, I can't
seem to get used to being a grandparent," added the Scarecrow in a
melancholy voice. "It's turning my straws gray." He plucked several
from his chest and held them out to her. "Why, those little villains
don't even believe in Oz! 'It's not on the map, old
Grandpapapapapah!'" he mumbled, imitating the tones of his little
grandsons so cleverly that Dorothy laughed in spite of herself.

"This is what becomes of pride!" The Scarecrow extended his hands
expressively. "Most people who hunt up their family trees are in for
a fall, and I've had mine."

"But who do you want to be?" asked the Knight gravely. "A Scarecrow
in Oz--or the--er--Emperor that you were?"

"I don't care who I were!" In his excitement, the Scarecrow lost his
grammar completely. "I want to be who I am. I want to be myself."

"But which one?" asked the Cowardly Lion, who was still a bit
confused.

"Why, my best self, of course," said the Scarecrow with a bright
smile. The sight of his old friends had quite restored his
cheerfulness. "I've been here long enough to know that I am a better
Scarecrow than an Emperor."

"Why, how simple it is!" sighed Dorothy contentedly. "Professor
Wogglebug was all wrong. It's not what you were, but what you are--
it's being yourself that counts."

"By my Halidom, the little maid is right!" said Sir Hokus, slapping
his knee in delight. "Let your Gheewizard but try his
transformations! Out on him! But what says yon honest henchman?"
Happy Toko, although he understood no word of the conversation, had
been watching the discussion with great interest. He had been trying
to attract the Scarecrow's attention for some time, but the Knight
was the only one who had noticed him.

"What is it, Tappy?" asked the Scarecrow, dropping easily back into
Silver Islandish.

"Honored Master, the dawn approaches and with it the Royal Princes
and the Grand Gheewizard--and your bride!" Happy paused
significantly. The Scarecrow shuddered.

"Let's go back to Oz!" said the Cowardly Lion uneasily.

The Scarecrow was feeling in the pocket of his old Munchkin suit
which he always wore under his robes of state. "Here!" said he,
giving a little pill to Happy Toko. "It's one of Professor
Wogglebug's language pills," he exclaimed to Dorothy, "and will
enable him to speak and understand Ozish." Happy swallowed the pill
gravely.

"Greetings, honorable Ozites!" he said politely as soon as the pill
was down. Dorothy clapped her hands in delight, for it was so
comfortable to have him speak their own language.

"I could never have stood it here without Tappy Oko!" The Scarecrow
looked fondly at his Imperial Punster.

"Queer name he has," rumbled the Cowardly Lion, looking at Happy Toko
as if he had thoughts of eating him.

"Methinks he should be knighted," rumbled Sir Hokus, beaming on the
little Silverman. "Rise, Sir Pudding!"

"The sun will do that in a minute or more, and then, then we shall
all be thrown into prison!" wailed Happy Toko dismally.

"We were going to escape in a small boat," explained the Scarecrow,
"but--" It was not necessary for him to finish. A boat large enough
to hold Dorothy, the Cowardly Lion, the Scarecrow, Happy Toko, the
camel and the dromedary could not very well be launched in secret.

"Oh, dear!" sighed Dorothy, "If I'd only wished you and all of us
back in the Emerald City!"

"You wished very well, Lady Dot," said the Knight. "When I think of
what I was going to wish for--"

"What were you going to wish, Hokus?" asked the Cowardly Lion
curiously.

"For a dragon!" faltered the Knight, looking terribly ashamed.

"A dragon!" gasped Dorothy. "Why, what good would that have done us?"

"Wait!" interrupted the Scarecrow. "I have thought of something! Why
not climb my family tree? It is a long, long way, but at the top lies
Oz!"

"Grammercy, a pretty plan!" exclaimed Sir Hokus, peering up at the
bean pole.

"Wouldn't that be social climbing?" chuckled Happy Toko, recovering
his spirits with a bound. The Cowardly Lion said nothing, but heaved
a mighty sigh which no one heard, for they were all running toward
the bean pole. It was a good family tree to climb, sure enough, for
there were handy little notches in the stalk.

"You go first!" Sir Hokus helped Dorothy up. When she had gone a few
steps, the Scarecrow, holding his robes carefully, followed, then
honest Happy Toko.

"I'll go last," said Sir Hokus bravely, and had just set his foot on
the first notch when a hoarse scream rang through the hall.



CHAPTER 19

PLANNING TO FLY FROM THE SILVER ISLAND

It was the Comfortable Camel. Waking suddenly, he found himself
deserted. "Oh, where is my dear Karwan Bashi?" he roared dismally.
"Come back! Come back!"

"Hush up, can't you?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion. "Do you want Dorothy
and everybody to be thrown into prison on our account? We can't climb
the bean pole and will have to wait here and face it out."

"But how uncomfortable," wailed the camel. He began to sob heavily.
Dorothy, although highest up the bean pole, heard all of this
distinctly. "Oh," she cried remorsefully, "we can't desert the
Cowardly Lion like this. I never thought about him."

"Spoken like the dear little Maid you are," said the Knight. "The
good beast never reminded us of it, either. There's bravery for you!"

"Let us descend at once, I'll not move a step without the Cowardly
Lion!" In his agitation, the Scarecrow lost his balance and fell
headlong to the ground, knocking Sir Hokus's helmet terribly askew as
he passed. The others made haste to follow him and were soon gathered
gravely at the foot of the beanstalk.

"I'll have to think of some other plan," said the Scarecrow, looking
nervously at the sky, which showed, through the long windows, the
first streaks of dawn. The Comfortable Camel controlled its sobs with
difficulty and pressed as close to Sir Hokus as it could. The
Doubtful Dromedary was still asleep.

"It would have been a terrible climb," mused the Scarecrow, thinking
of his long, long fall down the pole. "Ah, I have it!"

"What?" asked Dorothy anxiously.

"I wonder I did not think of it before. Ah, my brains are working
better! I will abdicate," exclaimed the Scarecrow triumphantly. "I
will abdicate, make a farewell speech, and return with you to Oz!"

"What if they refuse to let your radiant Highness go?" put in Happy
Toko tremulously. "What if the Gheewizard should work his magic
before you finished your speech?"

"Then we'll make a dash for it!" said Sir Hokus, twirling his sword
recklessly.

"I'm with you," said the Cowardly Lion huskily, "but you needn't have
come back for me."

"All right!" said the Scarecrow cheerfully. "And now that
everything's settled so nicely, we might as well enjoy the little
time left. Put out the lights, Tappy. Dorothy and I will sit on the
throne, and the rest of you come as close as possible."

Sir Hokus wakened the Doubtful Dromedary and pulled and tugged it
across the hall, where it immediately fell down asleep again. The
Comfortable Camel ambled about eating the flowers out of the vases.
The Cowardly Lion had placed himself at Dorothy's feet, and Sir Hokus
and Happy Toko seated themselves upon the first step of the gorgeous
silver throne.

Then, while they waited for morning, Dorothy told the Scarecrow all
about the Pokes and Fix City, and the Scarecrow told once again of
his victory over the king of the Golden Islands.

"Where is the magic fan now?" asked Dorothy at the end of the story.

The Scarecrow smiled broadly, and feeling in a deep pocket brought
out the little fan and also the parasol he had plucked from the
beanstalk. "Do you know," he said smiling, "so much has happened I
haven't thought of them since the battle. I was saving them for you,
Dorothy."

"For me!" exclaimed the little girl in delight. "Let me see them!"
The Scarecrow handed them over obligingly, but Happy Toko trembled so
violently that he rolled down the steps of the throne.

"I beg of you!" He scrambled to his feet and held up his hands in
terror. "I beg of you, don't open that fan!"

"She's used to magic, Tappy. You needn't worry," said the Scarecrow
easily.

"Of course I am," said Dorothy with great dignity. "But this'll be
mighty useful if anyone tries to conquer Oz again. We can just fan
'em away."

Dorothy pulled a hair from the Cowardly Lion's mane, and winding it
around the little fan, put it carefully in the pocket of her dress.
The parasol she hung by its ribbon to her arm.

"Perhaps Ozma will look in the Magic Picture and wish us all back
again," said the little girl after they had sat for a time in
silence.

"I doubt it." The Dromedary stirred and mumbled in its sleep.

"Singular beast, that!" ejaculated the Knight. "Doubting never gets
one anywhere."

"Hush!" warned the Scarecrow. "I hear footsteps!"

"Come here." Sir Hokus called hoarsely to the camel, who was eating a
paper lantern at the other end of the room. The beast ran awkwardly
over to the throne, and swallowing the lantern with a convulsive
gulp, settled down beside the dromedary.

"Whatever happens, we must stick together," said the Knight
emphatically. "Ah--!"

Dorothy held fast to the Scarecrow with one hand and to the throne
with the other. The sun had risen at last. There was a loud crash of
drums and trumpets, a rush of feet, and into the hall marched the
most splendid company Dorothy had seen in her whole life of
adventures.



CHAPTER 20

DOROTHY UPSETS THE CEREMONY OF THE ISLAND

"A caravan!" whistled the Comfortable Camel, lurching to his feet.
"How nice!"

"I doubt that!" The dromedary's eyes flew open, and he stared
sleepily at the magnificent procession of Silver Islanders.

First came the musicians, playing their shining silver trumpets and
flutes. The Grand Chew Chew and General Mugwump followed, attired in
brilliant silk robes of state. Then came the three Princes,
glittering with jeweled chains and medals, and the fifteen little
Princes, like so many silver butterflies in their satin kimonas. Next
appeared a palanquin bearing the veiled Princess Orange Blossom,
followed by a whole company of splendid courtiers and after them as
many of the everyday Silver Islanders as the hall would hold. There
was a moment of silence. Then the whole assemblage, contrary to the
Scarecrow's edict, fell upon their faces.

"My!" exclaimed Dorothy, impressed in spite of herself. "Are you sure
you want to give up all this?"

"Great Emperor, beautiful as the sun, wise as the stars, and radiant
as the clouds, the Ceremony of Restoration is about to begin!"
quavered the Grand Chew Chew, rising slowly. Then he paused, for he
was suddenly confused by the strange company around the Scarecrow's
throne.

"Treachery!" hissed the eldest Prince to the others. "We left him
tied to the bean pole. Ancient Papa Scarecrow needs watching! Who are
these curious objects he has gathered about him, pray?"

Now by some magic which even I cannot explain, the people from Oz
found they could understand all that was being said. When Dorothy
heard herself called an object and saw the wicked faces of the three
Princes and the stupid little grandsons, she no longer wondered at
the Scarecrow's decision.

The Scarecrow himself bowed calmly. "First," said he cheerfully, "let
me introduce my friends and visitors from Oz."

The Silver Islanders, who really loved the Scarecrow, bowed politely
as he called out the names of Dorothy and the others. But the three
Silver Princes scowled and whispered indignantly among themselves.

"I am growing very wroth!" choked Sir Hokus to the Cowardly Lion.

"Let the ceremony proceed!" called the eldest Prince harshly, before
the Scarecrow had finished his introductions. "Let the proper body of
his Serene Highness be immediately restored. Way for the Grand
Gheewizard! Way for the Grand Gheewizard!"

"One moment," put in the Scarecrow in a dignified voice. "I have
something to say." The Silver Islanders clapped loudly at this, and
Dorothy felt a bit reassured. Perhaps they would listen to reason
after all and let the Scarecrow depart peacefully. How they were ever
to escape if they didn't, the little girl could not see.

"My dear children," began the Scarecrow in his jolly voice, "nothing
could have been more wonderful than my return to this lovely island,
but in the years I have been away from you I have changed very much,
and I find I no longer care for being Emperor. So with your kind
permission, I will keep the excellent body I now have and will
abdicate in favor of my eldest son and return with my friends to Oz.
For in Oz I really belong."

A dead silence followed the Scarecrow's speech--then perfect
pandemonium.

"No! No! You are a good Emperor! We will not let you go!" shrieked
the people. "You are our honorable little Father. The Prince shall be
Emperor after you have peacefully returned to your ancestors, but not
now. No! No! We will not have it!"

"I feared this!" quavered Happy Toko.

"It is not the Emperor, but the Scarecrow who speaks!" shrilled the
Grand Chew Chew craftily. "He knows not what he says. But after the
transformation--Ah, you shall see!"

The company calmed down at this. "Let the ceremony proceed! Way for
the Grand Gheewizard!" they cried exultantly.

"Chew Chew," wailed the Scarecrow, "you're off the track!" But it was
too late. No one would listen.

"I'll have to think of something else," muttered the Scarecrow,
sinking dejectedly back on his throne.

"Oh!" shuddered Dorothy, clutching the Scarecrow, "Here he comes!"

"Way for the Grand Gheewizard! Way for the Grand Gheewizard!"

The crowd parted. Hobbling toward the throne came the ugly little
Gheewizard of the Silver Island holding a large silver vase high
above his head, and after him--!

When Sir Hokus caught a glimpse of what came after, he leaped clean
over the Comfortable Camel.

"Uds daggers!" roared the Knight. "_At last!"_
He rushed forward violently. There was a sharp thrust of his good
sword, then an explosion like twenty giant firecrackers in one,
and the room became quite black with smoke. Before anyone
realized what had happened, Sir Hokus was back, dragging
something after him and shouting exuberantly, "A dragon! I have
slain a dragon! What happiness!"

Everyone was coughing and spluttering from the smoke, but as it
cleared Dorothy saw that it was indeed a dragon Sir Hokus had slain,
the rheumatic dragon of the old Gheewizard himself.

"Why didn't you get the wizard?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion angrily.

"Must have exploded," said the Comfortable Camel, sniffing the skin
daintily.

"Treason!" yelled the three Princes, while the Grand Gheewizard flung
himself on the stone floor and began tearing strand after strand from
his silver pigtail.

"He has killed the little joy of my hearth!" screeched the old man.
"I will turn him to a cat, a miserable yellow cat, and roast him for
dinner!"

"Oh!" cried Dorothy, looking at Sir Hokus sorrowfully. "How could
you?"

The slaying of the dragon had thrown the whole hall into utmost
confusion. Sir Hokus turned a little pale under his armor, but faced
the angry mob without flinching.

"Oh, my dear Karwan Bashi, this is so uncomfortable!" wheezed the
camel, glancing back of him with frightened eyes.

"There's a shiny dagger in my left-hand saddlesack. I doubt very much
whether they would like it," coughed the Doubtful Dromedary, pressing
close to the Knight.

"On with the ceremony!" cried the eldest Prince, seeing that the
excitement was giving the Scarecrow's friends too much time to think.
"The son of an iron pot shall be punished later!"

"That's right!" cried a voice from the crowd. "Let the Emperor be
restored!"

"I guess it's all over," gulped the Scarecrow. "Give my love to Ozma
and tell her I tried to come back."

In helpless terror, the little company watched the Gheewizard
approach. One could fight real enemies, but _magic!_ Even Sir Hokus,
brave as he was, felt that nothing could be done.

"One move and you shall be so many prunes," shrilled the angry old
man, fixing the people from Oz with his wicked little eyes. The great
room was so still you could have heard a pin drop. Even the Doubtful
Dromedary had not the heart to doubt the wizard's power, but stood
rigid as a statue.

The wizard advanced slowly, holding the sealed vase carefully over
his head. The poor Scarecrow regarded it with gloomy fascination. One
more moment and he would be an old, old Silverman. Better to be lost
forever! He held convulsively to Dorothy.

As for Dorothy herself, she was trembling with fright and grief. When
the Grand Gheewizard raised the vase higher and higher and made ready
to hurl it at the Scarecrow, disregarding his dire threat she gave a
shrill scream and threw up both hands.

"Great grandmothers!" gasped the Scarecrow, jumping to his feet. As
Dorothy had thrown up her arms, the little parasol swinging at her
wrist had jerked open. Up, up, up, and out through the broken
skylight in the roof sailed the little Princess of Oz!

The Grand Gheewizard, startled as anyone, failed to throw the vase.
Every neck was craned upward, and everyone was gasping with
astonishment.

The oldest Prince, as usual, was the first to recover. "Don't stand
staring like an idiot! Now's your chance!" he hissed angrily in the
Gheewizard's ear.

"I didn't come here to be harried and hurried by foreigners," sobbed
the little man. "How is one to work magic when interrupted every
other minute? I want my little dragon."

"Oh, come on now, just throw it. I'll get you another dragon," begged
the Prince, his hands trembling with excitement.

In the face of this new disaster, the Scarecrow had forgotten all
about the Gheewizard. He and the Cowardly Lion and Sir Hokus were
running distractedly around the great throne trying to think up a way
to rescue Dorothy. As for the Doubtful Dromedary, he was doubting
everything in a loud, bitter voice, while the Comfortable Camel
fairly snorted with sorrow.

"There! Now's your chance," whispered the Prince. The Scarecrow, with
his back to the crowd, was gesturing frantically.

Taking a firm hold on the neck of the vase and with a long
incantation which there is no use at all in repeating, the Gheewizard
flung the bottle straight at the Scarecrow's head. But scarcely had
it left his hand before there was a flash and a flutter and down came
Dorothy and the magic parasol right on top of the vase.

Zip! The vase flew in quite another direction, and next minute had
burst over the luckless heads of the three plotting Princes, while
Dorothy floated gently to earth.

Sir Hokus embraced the Scarecrow, and the Scarecrow hugged the
Cowardly Lion, and I don't wonder at all. For no sooner had the magic
elixir touched the Princes, than two of them became silver pigs and
the eldest a weasel. They had been turned to their true shapes
instead of the Scarecrow. And while the company hopped about in
alarm, they ran squealing from the hall and disappeared in the
gardens.

"Seize the Gheewizard and take him to his cave," ordered the
Scarecrow, asserting his authority for the first time since the
proceedings has started. He had noticed the old man making queer
signs and passes toward Sir Hokus. A dozen took hold of the
struggling Gheewizard and hurried him out of the hall.

Sir Hokus, at the request of the Scarecrow, clapped his iron
gauntlets for silence.

"You will agree with me, I'm sure," said the Scarecrow in a slightly
unsteady voice, "that magic is a serious matter to meddle with. If
you will all return quietly to your homes, I will try to find a way
out of our difficulties."

The Silver Islanders listened respectfully and after a little arguing
among themselves backed out of the throne room. To tell the truth,
they were anxious to spread abroad the tale of the morning's
happenings.

Princess Orange Blossom, however, refused to depart. Magic or no
magic, she had come to marry the Emperor, and she would not leave
till the ceremony had been performed.

"But my dear old Lady, would you wish to marry a Scarecrow?" coaxed
the Emperor.

"All men are Scarecrows," snapped the Princess sourly.

"Then why marry at all?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion, making a playful
leap at her palanquin. This was too much. The Princess swooned on the
spot, and the Scarecrow, taking advantage of her unconscious
condition, ordered her chair bearers to carry her away as far and as
fast as they could run.

"Now," said the Scarecrow when the last of the company had
disappeared, "let us talk this over."



CHAPTER 21

THE ESCAPE FROM THE SILVER ISLAND

"Well!" gasped Dorothy, fanning herself with her hat, "I never was so
s'prised in my life!"

"Nor I," exclaimed the Scarecrow. "The Grand Gheewizard will be suing
you for parassault and battery. But how did it happen?"

"Well," began Dorothy, "as soon as the parasol opened, I flew up so
fast that I could hardly breathe. Then, after I'd gone ever so far,
it came to me that if the parasol went up when it was up, it would
come down when it was down. I couldn't leave you all in such a fix--
so I closed it, and--"

"Came down!" finished the Scarecrow with a wave of his hand. "You
always do the right thing in the right place, my dear."

"It was lucky I hit the vase, wasn't it?" sighed Dorothy. "But I'm
rather sorry about the Princes."

"Served 'em right," growled the Cowardly Lion. "They'll make very
good pigs!"

"But who's to rule the island?" demanded Sir Hokus, turning his gaze
reluctantly from the smoking dragonskin.

"This will require thought," said the Scarecrow pensively. "Let us
all think."

"I doubt that I can ever think again." The Doubtful Dromedary wagged
his head from side to side in a dazed fashion.

"Just leave it to our dear Karwan Bashi." The Comfortable Camel
nodded complacently at the Knight and began plucking sly wisps from
the Scarecrow's boot top. For a short time there was absolute
silence.

Then Sir Hokus, who had been thinking tremendously with his elbows on
his knees, burst out, "Why not Sir Pudding, here? Why not this honest
Punster? Who but Happy Toko deserves the throne?"

"The very person!" cried the Scarecrow, clasping his yellow gloves,
and taking off his silver hat, he set it impulsively upon the head of
the fat little Silver Islander.

"He'll make a lovely Emperor," said Dorothy. "He's so kind-hearted
and jolly. And now the Scarecrow can abdicate and come home to Oz."

They all looked triumphantly at the Imperial Punster, but Happy Toko,
snatching off the royal hat, burst into tears.

"Don't leave me behind, amiable Master!" he sobbed disconsolately.
"Oh, how I shall miss you!"

"But don't you see," coaxed Dorothy, "the Scarecrow needs you here
more than anyplace, and think of all the fine clothes you will have
and how rich you will be!"

"And Tappy, my dear boy," said the Scarecrow, putting his arm around
Happy Toko, "you might not like Oz any more than I like Silver
Island. Then think--if everything goes well, you can visit me--just
as one Emperor visits another!"

"And you won't forget me?" sniffed Happy, beginning to like the idea
of being Emperor.

"Never!" cried the Scarecrow with an impressive wave.

"And if anything goes wrong, will you help me out?" questioned Happy
uncertainly.

"We'll look in the Magic Picture of Oz every month," declared
Dorothy, "and if you need us we'll surely find some way to help you."

"An' you ever require a trusty sword, Odds Bodikins!" exclaimed Sir
Hokus, pressing Tappy's hand, "I'm your man!"

"All right, dear Master!" Happy slowly picked up the Imperial hat and
set it sideways on his head. "I'll do my best."

"I don't doubt it at all," said the Doubtful Dromedary to everyone's
surprise.

"Three cheers for the Emperor! Long live the Emperor of the Silver
Island," rumbled the Cowardly Lion, and everybody from Oz, even the
camel and dromedary, fell upon their knees before Happy Toko.

"You may have my bride, too, Tappy," chuckled the Scarecrow with a
wink at Dorothy. "And Tappy," he asked, sobering suddenly, "will you
have my grandsons brought up like real children? Just as soon as I
return, I shall send them all the Books of Oz."

Happy bowed, too confused and excited for speech.

"Now," said the Scarecrow, seizing Dorothy's hand, "I can return to
Oz with an easy mind."

"Doubt that," said the Doubtful Dromedary.

"You needn't!" announced Dorothy. "I've thought it all out." In a few
short sentences she outlined her plan.

"Bravo!" roared the Cowardly Lion, and now the little party began in
real earnest the preparation for the journey back to Oz.

First, Happy brought them a delicious luncheon, with plenty of twigs
and hay for the camel and dromedary and meat for the Cowardly Lion.
The Scarecrow packed into the camel's sacks a few little souvenirs
for the people of Oz. Then they dressed Happy Toko in the Scarecrow's
most splendid robe and ordered him to sit upon the throne. Next, the
Scarecrow rang for one of the palace servants and ordered the people
of the Silver Islands to assemble in the hall.

Presently the Silvermen began to come trooping in, packing the great
throne room until it could hold no more. Everyone was chattering
excitedly.

It was quite a different company that greeted them. The Scarecrow,
cheerful and witty in his old Munchkin suit, Dorothy and Sir Hokus
smiling happily, and the three animal members of the party fairly
blinking with contentment.

"This," said the Scarecrow pleasantly when everyone was quiet, "is
your new Emperor, to whom I ask you to pledge allegiance." He waved
proudly in the direction of Happy Toko, who, to tell the truth,
presented a truly royal appearance. "It is not possible for me to
remain with you, but I shall always watch over this delightful island
and with the magic fan vanquish all its enemies and punish all
offenders."

Happy Toko bowed to his subjects.

The Silver Islanders exchanged startled glances, then, as the
Scarecrow carelessly lifted the fan, they fell prostrate to the
earth.

"Ah!" said the Scarecrow with a broad wink at Happy. "This is
delightful. You agree with me, I see. Now then, three cheers for
Tappy Oko, Imperial Emperor of the Silver Island."

The cheers were given with a will, and Happy in acknowledgement made
a speech that has since been written into the Royal Book of state as
a masterpiece of eloquence.

Having arranged affairs so satisfactorily, the Scarecrow embraced
Happy Toko with deep emotion. Dorothy and Sir Hokus shook hands with
him and wished him every success and happiness. Then the little party
from Oz walked deliberately to the bean pole in the center of the
hall.

The Silver Islanders were still a bit dazed by the turn affairs had
taken and stared in astonishment as the Scarecrow and Sir Hokus
fastened thick ropes around the Cowardly Lion, the Doubtful Dromedary
and the Comfortable Camel. Similar ropes they tied around their own
waists and Dorothy's, and the ends of all were fastened securely to
the handle of the magic parasol, which Dorothy held carefully.

"Goodbye, everybody!" called the little girl, suddenly opening the
parasol.

"Goodbye!" cried the genial Scarecrow, waving his hand.

Too stupefied for speech, the assemblage gaped with amazement as the
party floated gently upward. Up--up--and out of sight whirled the
entire party.



CHAPTER 22

THE FLIGHT OF THE PARASOL

Holding the handle of the parasol, Dorothy steered it with all the
skill of an aviator, and in several minutes after their start the
party had entered the deep, black passage down which the Scarecrow
had fallen. Each one of the adventurers was fastened to the parasol
with ropes of different length so that none of them bumped together,
but even with all the care in the world it was not possible to keep
them from bumping the sides of the tube. The Comfortable Camel
grunted plaintively from time to time, and Dorothy could hear the
Doubtful Dromedary complaining bitterly in the darkness. It was pitch
dark, but by keeping one hand in touch with the bean pole, Dorothy
managed to hold the parasol in the center.

"How long will it take?" she called breathlessly to the Scarecrow,
who was dangling just below.

"Hours!" wheezed the Scarecrow, holding fast to his hat. "I hope none
of the parties on this line hear us," he added nervously, thinking of
the Middlings.

"What recks it?" blustered Sir Hokus. "Hast forgotten my trusty
sword?" But his words were completely drowned in the rattle of his
armor.

"Hush!" warned the Scarecrow, "Or we'll be pulled in." So for almost
an hour, they flew up the dark, chimney-like tube with only an
occasional groan as one or another scraped against the rough sides of
the passage. Then, before they knew what was happening, the parasol
crashed into something, half closed, and the whole party started to
fall head over heels over helmets.

"O!" gasped Dorothy, turning a complete somersault, "catch hold of
the bean pole, somebody!"

"Put up the parasol!" shrieked the Scarecrow. Just then Dorothy,
finding herself right side up, grasped the pole herself and snapped
the parasol wide open. Up, up, up they soared again, faster than
ever!

"We're flying up much faster than I fell down. We must be at the
top!" called the Scarecrow hoarsely, "and somebody has closed the
opening!"



CHAPTER 23

SAFE AT LAST IN THE LAND OF OZ

"Must we keep bumping until we bump through?" panted Dorothy
anxiously.

"No, by my hilts!" roared Sir Hokus, and setting his foot in a notch
of the beanstalk, he cut with his sword the rope that bound him to
the parasol. "Put the parasol down half way, and I'll climb ahead and
cut an opening."

With great difficulty Dorothy partially lowered the parasol, and
instantly their speed diminished. Indeed, they barely moved at all,
and the Knight had soon passed them on his climb to the top.

"Are you there?" rumbled the Cowardly Lion anxiously. A great clod of
earth landed on his head, filling his eyes and mouth with mud.

"Ugh!" roared the lion.

"It's getting light! It's getting light!" screamed Dorothy, and in
her excitement snapped the parasol up.

Sir Hokus, having cut with his sword a large circular hole in the
thin crust of earth covering the tube, was about to step out when the
parasol, hurling up from below, caught him neatly on its top, and out
burst the whole party and sailed up almost to the clouds!

"Welcome to Oz!" cried Dorothy, looking down happily on the dear
familiar Munchkin landscape.

"Home at last!" exulted the Scarecrow, wafting a kiss downward.

"Let's get down to earth before we knock the sun into a cocked hat,"
gasped the Cowardly Lion, for Dorothy, in her excitement, had
forgotten to lower the parasol.

Now the little girl lowered the parasol carefully at first, then
faster and faster and finally shut it altogether.

Sir Hokus took a high dive from the top. Down tumbled the others,
over and over. But fortunately for all, there was a great haystack
below, and upon this they landed in a jumbled heap close to the magic
bean pole. As it happened, there was no one in sight. Up they jumped
in a trice, and while the Comfortable Camel and Doubtful Dromedary
munched contentedly at the hay, Sir Hokus and the Scarecrow placed
some loose boards over the opening around the bean pole and covered
them with dirt and cornstalks.

"I will get Ozma to close it properly with the Magic Belt," said the
Scarecrow gravely. "It wouldn't do to have people sliding down my
family tree and scaring poor Tappy. As for me, I shall never leave Oz
again!"

"I hope not," growled the Cowardly Lion, tenderly examining his
scratched hide.

"But if you hadn't, I'd never have had such lovely adventures or
found Sir Hokus and the Comfortable Camel and Doubtful Dromedary,"
said Dorothy. "And what a lot I have to tell Ozma! Let's go straight
to the Emerald City."

"It's quite a journey," explained the Scarecrow to Sir Hokus, who was
cleaning off his armor with a handful of straw.

"I go where Lady Dot goes," replied the Knight, smiling
affectionately at the little girl and straightening the ragged hair
ribbon which he still wore on his arm.

"Don't forget me, dear Karwan Bashi," wheezed the Comfortable Camel,
putting his head on the Knight's shoulder.

"You're a sentimental dunce, Camy. I doubt whether they'll take us at
all!" The Doubtful Dromedary looked wistfully at Dorothy.

"Go to, now!" cried Sir Hokus, putting an arm around each neck.
"You're just like two of the family!"

"It will be very comfortable to go to now," sighed the camel.

"We're all a big, jolly family here," said the Scarecrow, smiling
brightly, "and Oz is the friendliest country in the world."

"Right," said the Cowardly Lion, "but let's get started!" He
stretched his tired muscles and began limping stiffly toward the
yellow brick road.

"Wait," cried Dorothy, "have you forgotten the parasol?"

"I wish I could," groaned the Cowardly Lion, rolling his eyes.

Sir Hokus, with folded arms, was gazing regretfully at the bean pole.
"It has been a brave quest," he sighed, "but now, I take it, our
adventures are over!" Absently, the Knight felt in his boot-top and
drawing out a small red bean popped it into his mouth. Just before
reaching the top of the tube, he had pulled a handful of them from
the beanstalk, but the others had fallen out when he dove into the
hay.

"Shall we use the parasol again, Lady Dot?" he asked, still staring
pensively at the bean pole. "Shall--?"

He got no farther, nor did Dorothy answer his question. Instead, she
gave a loud scream and clutched the Scarecrow's arm. The Scarecrow,
taken by surprise, fell over backward, and the Comfortable Camel,
raising his head inquiringly, gave a bellow of terror. From the
Knight's shoulders a green branch had sprung, and while the company
gazed in round-eyed amazement it stretched toward the bean pole,
attached itself firmly, and then shot straight up into the air, the
Knight kicking and struggling on the end. In another second, he was
out of sight.

"Come back! Come back!" screamed the Comfortable Camel, running
around distractedly.

"I doubt we'll ever see him again!" groaned the Doubtful Dromedary,
craning his neck upward.

"Do something! Do something!" begged Dorothy. At which the Scarecrow
jumped up and dashed toward the little farmhouse.

"I'll get an ax," he called over his shoulder, "and chop down the
bean pole."

"No, don't do that!" roared the Cowardly Lion, starting after him.
"Do you want to break him to pieces?"

"Oh! Oh! Can't you think of something else?" cried Dorothy. "And
hurry, or he'll be up to the moon!"

The Scarecrow put both hands to his head and stared around wildly.
Then, with a triumphant wave of his hat, declared himself ready to
act.

"The parasol!" cried the late Emperor of Silver Island. "Quick,
Dorothy, put up the parasol!"

Snatching the parasol, which lay at the foot of the bean pole,
Dorothy snapped it open, and the Scarecrow just had time to make a
flying leap and seize the handle before it soared upward, and in a
trice they, too, had disappeared.

"Doubty! Doubty!" wailed the Comfortable Camel, crowding up to his
humpbacked friend, "we're having a pack of trouble. My knees are all
a-tremble!"

"Now don't you worry," advised the Cowardly Lion, sitting down
resignedly. "I'm frightened myself, but that's because I'm so
cowardly. Queer things happen in Oz, but they usually turn out all
right. Why, Hokus is just growing up with the country, that's all,
just growing up with the country."

"Doubt that," sniffed the Doubtful Dromedary faintly. "He was grown
up in the beginning."

"But think of the Scarecrow's brains. You leave things to the
Scarecrow." But it was no use. Both beasts began to roar dismally.

"I don't want a plant. I want my Karwan Bashi," sobbed the
Comfortable Camel broken-heartedly.

"Well, don't drown me," begged the Cowardly Lion, moving out of the
way of the camel's tears. "Say, what's that draft?"

What indeed? In the trees overhead, a very cyclone whistled, and
before the three had even time to catch their breath, they were blown
high into the air and the next instant were hurtling toward the
Emerald City like three furry cannonballs, faster and faster.



CHAPTER 24

HOMEWARD BOUND TO THE EMERALD CITY

Dorothy and the Scarecrow, clinging fast to the magic parasol, had
followed the Knight almost to the clouds. At first, it looked as if
they would never catch up with him, so swiftly was the branch
growing, but it was not long before the little umbrella began to
gain, and in several minutes more they were beside Sir Hokus himself.

"Beshrew me, now!" gasped the Knight, stretching out his hand toward
Dorothy. "Can'st stop this reckless plant?"

"Give me your sword," commanded the Scarecrow, "and I'll cut you
off."

Dorothy, with great difficulty, kept the parasol close to the Knight
while the Scarecrow reached for the sword. But Sir Hokus backed away
in alarm.

"'Tis part of me, an' you cut it off, I will be cut off, too. 'Tis
rooted in my back," he puffed.

"What shall we do?" cried Dorothy in distress. "Maybe if we take hold
of his hands we can keep him from going any higher."

The Scarecrow, jamming down his hat so it wouldn't blow off, nodded
approvingly, and each holding the parasol with one hand gave the
other to the Knight. And when Dorothy pointed the parasol down, to
her great delight Sir Hokus came also, the thin green branch growing
just about as fast as they moved.

Just then the little fan, which had been rolling around merrily in
Dorothy's pocket, slipped out and fell straight down toward the three
unsuspecting beasts below. Draft! No wonder!

But Dorothy never missed it, and quite unconscious of such a calamity
anxiously talked over the Knight's predicament with the Scarecrow.
They both decided that the best plan was to fly straight to the
Emerald City and have Ozma release the Knight from the enchanted
beanstalk.

"I'm sorry you got tangled up in my family tree, old fellow," said
the Scarecrow after they had flown some time in silence, "but this
makes us relations, doesn't it?" He winked broadly at the Knight.

"So it does," said Sir Hokus jovially. "I'm a branch of your family
now. Yet methinks I should not have swallowed that bean."

"Bean?" questioned Dorothy. "What bean?" The Knight carefully
explained how he had plucked a handful of red beans from the
beanstalk just before reaching the top of the tube and how he had
eaten one.

"So that's what started you growing!" exclaimed Dorothy in surprise.

"Alas, yes!" admitted the Knight. "I've never felt more grown-up in
my life," he finished solemnly. "An adventurous country, this Oz!"

"I should say it was," chuckled the Scarecrow. "But isn't it almost
time we were reaching the Emerald City, Dorothy?"

"I think I'm going in the right direction," answered the little girl,
"but I'll fly a little lower to be sure."

"Not too fast! Not too fast!" warned Sir Hokus, looking nervously
over his shoulder at his long, wriggling stem.

"There's Ozma's palace!" cried the Scarecrow all at once.

"And there's Ozma!" screamed Dorothy, peering down delightedly. "And
Scraps and Tik-Tok and everybody!"

She pointed the parasol straight down, when a sharp tug from Sir
Hokus jerked them all back. They were going faster than the poor
Knight was growing, so Dorothy lowered the parasol half way, and
slowly they floated toward the earth, landing gently in one of the
flower beds of Ozma's lovely garden.

"Come along and meet the folks," said the Scarecrow as Dorothy closed
the parasol. But Sir Hokus clutched him in alarm.

"Hold! Hold!" gasped the Knight. "I've stopped growing, but if you
leave me I'll shoot up into the air again."

The Scarecrow and Dorothy looked at each other in dismay. Sure
enough, the Knight had stopped growing, and it was all they could do
to hold him down to earth, for the stubborn branch of beanstalk was
trying to straighten up. They had fallen quite a distance from the
palace itself, and all the people of Oz had their backs turned, so
had not seen their singular arrival.

"Hello!" called the Scarecrow loudly. Then "Help! Help!" as the
Knight jerked him twice into the air. But Ozma, Trot, Jack
Pumpkinhead and all the rest were staring upward and talking so
busily among themselves that they did not hear either Dorothy's or
the Scarecrow's cries. First one, then the other was snatched off his
feet, and although Sir Hokus, with tears in his eyes, begged them to
leave him to his fate, they held on with all their might. Just as it
looked as if they all three would fly into the air again, the little
Wizard of Oz happened to turn around.

"Look! Look!" he cried, tugging Ozma's sleeve.

"Why, it's Dorothy!" gasped Ozma, rubbing her eyes. "It's Dorothy
and--"

"Help! Help!" screamed the Scarecrow, waving one arm wildly. Without
waiting another second, all the celebrities of Oz came running toward
the three adventurers.

"Somebody heavy come take hold!" puffed Dorothy, out of breath with
her efforts to keep Sir Hokus on the ground.

The Ozites, seeing that help was needed at once, suppressed their
curiosity.

"I'm heavy," said Tik-Tok solemnly, clasping the Knight's arm. The
Tin Woodman seized his other hand, and Dorothy sank down exhausted on
the grass.

Princess Ozma pressed forward.

"What does it all mean? Where did you come from?" asked the little
Queen of Oz, staring in amazement at the strange spectacle before
her.

"And who is this medieval person?" asked Professor Wogglebug, pushing
forward importantly. (He had returned to the palace to collect more
data for the Royal Book of Oz.)

"He doesn't look evil to me," giggled Scraps, dancing up to Sir
Hokus, her suspender button eyes snapping with fun.

"He isn't," said Dorothy indignantly, for Sir Hokus was too shaken
about to answer. "He's my Knight Errant."

"Ah, I see," replied Professor Wogglebug. "A case of 'When Knighthood
was in flower.'" And would you believe it--the beanstalk at that
minute burst into a perfect shower of red blossoms that came tumbling
down over everyone. Before they had recovered from their surprise,
the branch snapped off close to the Knight's armor, and Tik-Tok, the
Tin Woodman and Sir Hokus rolled over in a heap. The branch itself
whistled through the air and disappeared.

"Oh," cried Dorothy, hugging the Knight impulsively, "I'm so glad."

"Are you all right?" asked the Scarecrow anxiously.

"Good as ever!" announced Sir Hokus, and indeed all traces of the
magic stalk had disappeared from his shoulders.

"Dorothy!" cried Ozma again. "What does it all mean?"

"Merely that I slid down my family tree and that Dorothy and this
Knight rescued me," said the Scarecrow calmly.

"And he's a real Royalty--so there!" cried Dorothy with a wave at the
Scarecrow and making a little face at Professor Wogglebug. "Meet his
Supreme Highness, Chang Wang Woe of Silver Island, who had abdicated
his throne and returned to be a plain Scarecrow in Oz!"

Then, as the eminent Educator of Oz stood gaping at the Scarecrow,
"Oh, Ozma, I've so much to tell you!"

"Begin! Begin!" cried the little Wizard. "For everything's mighty
mysterious. First, the Cowardly Lion and two unknown beasts shoot
through the air and stop just outside the third-story windows, and
there they hang although I've tried all my magic to get them down.
Then you and the Scarecrow drop in with a strange Knight!"

"Oh, the poor Cowardly Lion!" gasped Dorothy as the Wizard finished
speaking. "The magic fan!" She felt hurriedly in her pocket. "It's
gone!"

"It must have slipped out of your pocket and blown them here, and
they'll never come down till that fan is closed," cried the Scarecrow
in an agitated voice.

All of this was Greek to Ozma and the others, but when Dorothy begged
the little Queen to send for her Magic Belt, she did it without
question. This belt Dorothy had captured from the Gnome King, and it
enabled the wearer to wish people and objects wherever one wanted
them.

"I wish the magic fan to close and to come safely back to me," said
Dorothy as soon as she had clasped the belt around her waist. No
sooner were the words out before there was a loud crash and a series
of roars and groans. Everybody started on a run for the palace, Sir
Hokus ahead of all the rest. The fan had mysteriously returned to
Dorothy's pocket.

The three animals had fallen into a huge cluster of rose bushes and,
though badly scratched and frightened, were really unhurt.

"I doubt that I'll like Oz," quavered the Doubtful Dromedary,
lurching toward Sir Hokus.

"You might have been more careful of that fan," growled the Cowardly
Lion reproachfully, plucking thorns from his hide. The Comfortable
Camel was so overjoyed to see the Knight that he rested his head on
Sir Hokus's shoulder and began weeping down his armor.

And now that their adventures seemed really over, what explanations
were to be made! Sitting on the top step of the palace with all of
them around her, Dorothy told the whole wonderful story of the
Scarecrow's family tree. When her breath gave out, the Scarecrow took
up the tale himself, and as they all realized how nearly they had
lost their jolly comrade, many of the party shed real tears. Indeed,
Nick Chopper hugged the Scarecrow till there was not a whole straw in
his body.

"Never leave us again," begged Ozma, and the Scarecrow, crossing Nick
Chopper's heart (he had none of his own), promised that he never
would.

And what a welcome they gave Sir Hokus, the Doubtful Dromedary and
the Comfortable Camel! Only Professor Wogglebug seemed disturbed.
During the strange recital, he had grown quieter and quieter and
finally, with an embarrassed cough, had excused himself and hurried
into the palace.

He went directly to the study, and seating himself at a desk opened a
large book, none other than _The Royal Book of Oz_. Dipping an emerald
pen in the ink, he began a new chapter headed thus:

         HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY, THE SCARECROW

      Late Emperor and Imperial Sovereign of
                   Silver Island

Then, flipping over several pages to a chapter headed "Princess
Dorothy!", he wrote carefully at the end, "Dorothy, Princess and
Royal Discoverer of Oz."

Meanwhile, below stairs, the Scarecrow was distributing his gifts.
There were silver chains for everyone in the palace and shining
silver slippers for Ozma, Betsy Bobbin, Trot and Dorothy, and a
bottle of silver polish for Nick Chopper.

Dorothy presented Ozma with the magic fan and parasol, and they were
safely put away by Jellia Jamb with the other magic treasures of Oz.

Next, because they were all curious to see the Scarecrow's wonderful
Kingdom, they hurried upstairs to look in the Magic Picture.

"Show us the Emperor of Silver Island," commanded Ozma. Immediately
the beautiful silver throne room appeared. Happy Toko had removed his
imperial hat and was standing on his head to the great delight of the
whole court, and a host of little Silver Islander boys were peeking
in at the windows.

"Now doesn't that look cheerful?" asked the Scarecrow delightedly. "I
knew he'd make a good Emperor."

"I wish we would hear what he's saying," said Dorothy. "Oh, do look
at Chew Chew!" The Grand Chew Chew was standing beside the throne
scowling horribly.

"I think I can arrange for you to hear," muttered the Wizard of Oz,
and taking a queer magic instrument from his pocket, he whispered
"Aohbeeobbuy."

Instantly they heard the jolly voice of Happy Toko singing:

      Oh shine his shoes of silver,
      And brush his silver queue,
      For I am but an Emperor
      And he's the Grand Chew Chew!

Ozma laughed heartily as the picture faded away, and so did the
others. Indeed, there was so much to ask and wonder about that it
seemed as if they never would finish talking.

"Let's have a party--an old-fashioned Oz party," proposed Ozma when
the excitement had calmed down a bit. And an old-fashioned party it
was, with places for everybody and a special table for the Cowardly
Lion, the Hungry Tiger, Toto, the Glass Cat, the Comfortable Camel,
the Doubtful Dromedary and all the other dear creatures of that
amazing Kingdom.

Sir Hokus insisted upon stirring up a huge pasty for the occasion,
and there were songs, speeches and cheers for everyone, not
forgetting the Doubtful Dromedary.

At the cheering he rose with an embarrassed jerk of his long neck.
"In my left-hand saddle-sack," he said gruffly, "there is a quantity
of silken shawls and jewels. I doubt whether they are good enough,
but I would like Dorothy and Queen Ozma to have them."

"Hear! Hear!" cried the Scarecrow, pounding on the table with his
knife. Then everything grew quiet as Ozma told how she, with the help
of Glinda, the Good Sorceress, had stopped the war between the
Horners and Hoppers.

When she had finished, Sir Hokus sprang up impulsively. "I prithee,
lovely Lady, never trouble your royal head about wars again. From now
on, I will do battle for you and little Dorothy and Oz, and _I_ will be
your good Knight every day." At this, the applause was tremendous.

     Ye good Knight of Oz, full of courage and vim,
     Will do battle for us, and we'll take care of him!

shouted Scraps, who was becoming more excited every minute.

"I'll lend you some of my polish for your armor, old fellow," said
Nick Chopper as the Knight sat down, beaming with pleasure.

"Well," said Ozma with a smile when everyone had feasted and talked
to heart's content, "is everybody happy?"

"I am!" cried the Comfortable Camel. "For here I am perfectly
comfortable."

"I am!" cried Dorothy, putting her arm around the Scarecrow, who sat
next to her. "For I have found my old friend and made some new ones."

"I'm happy!" cried the Scarecrow, waving his glass, "because there is
no age in Oz, and I am still my old Ozish self."

"As for me," said the Knight, "I am happy, for I have served a Lady,
gone on a Quest, and _Slain a Dragon! Ozma, and Oz forever!_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Royal Book of Oz, by 
L. Frank Baum and Ruth Plumly Thompson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROYAL BOOK OF OZ ***

***** This file should be named 30537.txt or 30537.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/3/30537/

Produced by Michael Gray

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
