Suffrage Songs and Verses~~~﻿Project Gutenberg's Suffrage Songs and Verses, by Charlotte Perkins Gilman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Suffrage Songs and Verses

Author: Charlotte Perkins Gilman

Release Date: April 6, 2018 [EBook #56931]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUFFRAGE SONGS AND VERSES ***




Produced by MWS, Fay Dunn and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









Transcriber’s Note


 In this text version of “Suffrage Songs and Verses”:
    words in italics are marked with _underscores_, and
    words in small capitals are shown in UPPERCASE.

 Variant spelling, and inconsistent hyphenation are retained. A very
 few tangible printing errors have been corrected.




  Suffrage Songs and Verses

  By

  CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN


  [Illustration: Winged torch]


  10 Cents

  [Illustration: International Allied Printing Trades Council label
                 11
                 New York
                 1911]

  THE CHARLTON COMPANY
  67 Wall Street, New York
  1911




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                        PAGE

  Another Star                           23
  Anti-Suffragists. The                  17
  Anti and the Fly. The                  19
  Boys Will Be Boys                       5
  Coming                                  3
  For Fear                                5
  Females                                10
  Girls of To-day                        12
  Housewife. The                          8
  Locked Inside                           3
  Mother to Child                         6
  Malingerer. The                        17
  Now                                     4
  Question. A                             8
  Reassurance                            15
  She Walketh Veiled and Sleeping         1
  She Who Is To Come                     24
  Socialist and the Suffragist. The      16
  Song for Equal Suffrage                22
  To the Indifferent Women               19
  Women of To-day                         4
  Women to Men                           13
  Women Do Not Want It                   21
  Wedded Bliss                            9
  We As Women                            11




NOTE--The poems marked * are from _In This Our World_ by Charlotte
      Perkins Gilman. Copyright, 1898, by Small, Maynard and Co., and
      are reprinted by the kind permission of the publishers. Those
      marked † are from the _Woman’s Journal_, and those marked _f_ are
      from THE FORERUNNER.




SHE WALKETH VEILED AND SLEEPING *


    She walketh veiled and sleeping,
    For she knoweth not her power;
    She obeyeth but the pleading
    Of her heart, and the high leading
    Of her soul, unto this hour.
    Slow advancing, halting, creeping,
    Comes the Woman to the hour!--
    She walketh veiled and sleeping,
    For she knoweth not her power.




COMING f


    Because the time is ripe, the age is ready,
    Because the world her woman’s help demands,
    Out of the long subjection and seclusion
    Come to our field of warfare and confusion
    The mother’s heart and hands.

    Long has she stood aside, endured and waited,
    While man swung forward, toiling on alone;
    Now, for the weary man, so long ill-mated,
    Now, for the world for which she was created,
    Comes woman to her own.

    Not for herself! though sweet the air of freedom;
    Not for herself, though dear the new-born power;
    But for the child, who needs a nobler mother,
    For the whole people, needing one another,
    Comes woman to her hour.




LOCKED INSIDE f


    She beats upon her bolted door,
      With faint weak hands;
    Drearily walks the narrow floor;
    Sullenly sits, blank walls before;
      Despairing stands.

    Life calls her, Duty, Pleasure, Gain--
      Her dreams respond;
    But the blank daylights wax and wane,
    Dull peace, sharp agony, slow pain--
      No hope beyond.

    Till she comes a thought! She lifts her head,
      The world grows wide!
    A voice--as if clear words were said--
    “Your door, O long imprisonéd,
      Is locked inside!”




NOW f


    With God Above--Beneath--Beside--
      Without--Within--and Everywhere;
    Rising with the resistless tide
      Of life, and Sure of Getting There.

    Patient with Nature’s long delay,
      Proud of our conscious upward swing;
    Not sorry for a single day,
      And Not Afraid of Anything!

    With Motherhood at last awake--
      With Power to Do and Light to See--
    Women may now begin to Make
      The People we are Meant to Be!




WOMEN OF TO-DAY *


    You women of today who fear so much
    The women of the future, showing how
    The dangers of her course are such and such--
                What are you now?

    Mothers and Wives and Housekeepers, forsooth!
    Great names, you cry, full scope to rule and please,
    Room for wise age and energetic youth!--
                But are you these?

    Housekeepers? Do you then, like those of yore,
    Keep house with power and pride, with grace and ease?
    No, you keep servants only! What is more--
                You don’t keep these!

    Wives, say you? Wives! Blessed indeed are they
    Who hold of love the everlasting keys,
    Keeping their husbands’ hearts! Alas the day!
                You don’t keep these!

    And mothers? Pitying Heaven! Mark the cry
    From cradle death-beds! Mothers on their knees!
    Why, half the children born, as children, die!
                You don’t keep these!

    And still the wailing babies come and go,
    And homes are waste, and husbands’ hearts fly far;
    There is no hope until you dare to know
                The thing you are!




BOYS WILL BE BOYS f


    “Boys will be boys,” and boys have had their day;
      Boy-mischief and boy-carelessness and noise
    Extenuated all, allowed, excused and smoothed away,
      Each duty missed, each damaging wild act,
      By this meek statement of unquestioned fact--
                    Boys will be boys!

    Now, “women will be women.” Mark the change;
      Calm motherhood in place of boisterous youth;
    No warfare now; to manage and arrange,
      To nurture with wise care, is woman’s way,
      In peace and fruitful industry her sway,
                    In love and truth.




FOR FEAR f


    For fear of prowling beasts at night
      They blocked the cave;
    Women and children hid from sight,
      Men scarce more brave.

    For fear of warrior’s sword and spear
      They barred the gate;
    Women and children lived in fear,
      Men lived in hate.

    For fear of criminals today
      We lock the door;
    Women and children still to stay
      Hid evermore.

    Come out! Ye need no longer hide!
      What fear you now?
    No wolf nor lion waits outside--
      Only a cow.

    Come out! The world approaches peace,
      War nears its end;
    No warrior watches your release--
      Only a friend.

    Come out! The night of crime has fled--
      Day is begun;
    Here is no criminal to dread--
      Only your son.

    The world, half yours, demands your care,
      Waken and come!
    Make it a woman’s world; safe, fair,
      Garden and home.




MOTHER TO CHILD *


    How best can I serve thee, my child! My child!
    Flesh of my flesh and dear heart of my heart!
    Once thou wast within me--I held thee--I fed thee--
    By the force of my loving and longing I led thee--
              Now we are apart!

    I may blind thee with kisses and crush with embracing,
    Thy warm mouth in my neck and our arms interlacing;
    But here in my body my soul lives alone,
    And thou answerest me from a house of thine own--
              That house which I builded!

    Which we builded together, thy father and I;
    In which thou must live, O my darling, and die!
    Not one stone can I alter, one atom relay--
    Not to save or defend thee or help thee to stay--
              That gift is completed!

    How best can I serve thee? O child, if they knew
    How my heart aches with loving! How deep and how true,
    How brave and enduring, how patient, how strong,
    How longing for good and how fearful of wrong,
              Is the love of thy mother!

    Could I crown thee with riches! Surround, overflow thee
    With fame and with power till the whole world should know thee;
    With wisdom and genius to hold the world still,
    To bring laughter and tears, joy and pain, at thy will,
              Still--_thou_ mightst not be happy!

    Such have lived--and in sorrow. The greater the mind
    The wider and deeper the grief it can find.
    The richer, the gladder, the more thou canst feel
    The keen stings that a lifetime is sure to reveal.
              O my child! Must thou suffer?

    Is there no way my life can save thine from a pain?
    Is the love of a mother no possible gain?
    No labor of Hercules--search for the Grail--
    No way for this wonderful love to avail?
              God in Heaven--O teach me!

    My prayer has been answered. The pain thou must bear
    Is the pain of the world’s life which thy life must share.
    Thou art one with the world--though I love thee the best;
    And to save thee from pain I must save all the rest--
              Well--with God’s help I’ll do it.

    Thou art one with the rest. I must love thee in them.
    Thou wilt sin with the rest; and thy mother must stem
    The world’s sin. Thou wilt weep, and thy mother must dry
    The tears of the world lest her darling should cry.
              I will do it--God helping!

    And I stand not alone. I will gather a band
    Of all loving mothers from land unto land.
    Our children are part of the world! Do ye hear?
    They are one with the world--we must hold them all dear!
              Love all for the child’s sake!

    For the sake of my child I must hasten to save
    All the children on earth from the jail and the grave.
    For so, and so only, I lighten the share
    Of the pain of the world that my darling must bear--
              Even so, and so only!




A QUESTION f


    Why is it, God, that mother’s hearts are made
      So very deep and wide?
    How does it help the world that we should hold
    Such welling floods of pain till we are old,
    Because when we were young one grave was laid--
    One baby died?




THE HOUSEWIFE f


    Here is the House to hold me--cradle of all the race;
    Here is my lord and my love, here are my children dear--
    Here is the House enclosing, the dear-loved dwelling place;
    Why should I ever weary for aught that I find not here?

    Here for the hours of the day and the hours of the night;
    Bound with the bands of Duty, rivetted tight;
    Duty older than Adam--Duty that saw
    Acceptance utter and hopeless in the eyes of the serving squaw.

    Food and the serving of food--that is my daylong care;
    What and when we shall eat, what and how we shall wear;
    Soiling and cleaning of things--that is my task in the main--
    Soil them and clean them and soil them--soil them and clean
         them again.

    To work at my trade by the dozen and never a trade to know;
    To plan like a Chinese puzzle--fitting and changing so;
    To think of a thousand details, each in a thousand ways;
    For my own immediate people and a possible love and praise.

    My mind is trodden in circles, tiresome, narrow and hard,
    Useful, commonplace, private--simply a small backyard;
    And I the Mother of Nations!--Blind their struggle and vain!--
    I cover the earth with my children--each with a housewife’s brain.




WEDDED BLISS *


    “O come and be my mate!” said the Eagle to the Hen;

              “I love to soar, but then
              I want my mate to rest
              Forever in the nest!”
              Said the Hen, “I cannot fly,
              I have no wish to try,

    But I joy to see my mate careening through the sky!”
    They wed, and cried, “Ah, this is Love, my own!”
    And the Hen sat, the Eagle soared, alone.

    “O come and be my mate!” said the Lion to the Sheep;

              “My love for you is deep!
              I slay, a Lion should,
              But you are mild and good!”
              Said the sheep, “I do no ill--
              Could not, had I the will--.

    But I joy to see my mate pursue, devour and kill.”
    They wed, and cried, “Ah, this is Love, my own!”
    And the Sheep browsed, the Lion prowled, alone.

    “O come and be my mate!” said the Salmon to the Clam;

              “You are not wise, but I am.
              I know sea and stream as well,
              You know nothing but your shell.”
              Said the Clam, “I’m slow of motion,
              But my love is all devotion,

    And I joy to have my mate traverse lake and stream and ocean!”
    They wed, and cried, “Ah, this is Love, my own!”
    And the Clam sucked, the Salmon swam, alone.




FEMALES *


    The female fox she is a fox;
    The female whale a whale;
    The female eagle holds her place
    As representative of race
    As truly as the male.

    The mother hen doth scratch for her chicks,
    And scratch for herself beside;
    The mother cow doth nurse her calf,
    Yet fares as well as her other half
    In the pasture free and wide.

    The female bird doth soar in air;
    The female fish doth swim;
    The fleet-foot mare upon the course
    Doth hold her own with the flying horse--
    Yea and she beateth him!

    One female in the world we find
    Telling a different tale.
    It is the female of our race,
    Who holds a parasitic place
    Dependent on the male.

    Not so, saith she, ye slander me!
    No parasite am I.
    I earn my living as a wife;
    My children take my very life;
    Why should I share in human strife,
    To plant and build and buy?

    The human race holds highest place
    In all the world so wide,
    Yet these inferior females wive,
    And raise their little ones alive,
    And feed themselves beside.

    The race is higher than the sex,
    Though sex be fair and good;
    A Human Creature is your state,
    And to be human is more great
    Than even womanhood!

    The female fox she is a fox;
    The female whale a whale;
    The female eagle holds her place
    As representative of race
    As truly as the male.




“WE AS WOMEN” *


    There’s a cry in the air about us--
    We hear it before, behind--
    Of the way in which “We, as women,”
    Are going to lift mankind!

    With our white frocks starched and ruffled,
    And our soft hair brushed and curled--
    Hats off! for “We, as women,”
    Are coming to save the world.

    Fair sisters, listen one moment--
    And perhaps you’ll pause for ten:
    The business of women as women
    Is only with men as men!

    What we do, “We, as women,”
    We have done all through our life;
    The work that is ours as women
    Is the work of mother and wife.

    But to elevate public opinion,
    And to lift up erring man,
    Is the work of the Human Being;
    Let us do it--if we can.

    But wait, warm-hearted sisters--
    Not quite so fast, so far.
    Tell me how we are going to lift a thing
    Any higher than we are!

    We are going to “purify politics,”
    And to “elevate the press.”
    We enter the foul paths of the world
    To sweeten and cleanse and bless.

    To hear the high things we are going to do,
    And the horrors of man we tell,
    One would think, “We, as women,” were angels,
    And our brothers were fiends of hell.

    We, that were born of one mother,
    And reared in the self-same place,
    In the school and the church together,
    We of one blood, one race!

    Now then, all forward together!
    But remember, every one,
    That ’tis not by feminine innocence
    The work of the world is done.

    The world needs strength and courage,
    And wisdom to help and feed--
    When, “We, as women” bring these to man,
    We shall lift the world indeed.




GIRLS OF TO-DAY *


    Girls of today! Give ear!
    Never since time began
    Has come to the race of man
    A year, a day, an hour,
    So full of promise and power
    As the time that now is here!

    Never in all the lands
    Was there a power so great,
    To move the wheels of state,
    To lift up body and mind,
    To waken the deaf and blind,
    As the power that is in your hands!

    Here at the gates of gold
    You stand in the pride of youth,
    Strong in courage and truth,
    Stirred by a force kept back
    Through centuries long and black,
    Armed with a power threefold!

    First: You are makers of men!
    Then Be the things you preach!
    Let your own greatness teach!
    When Mothers like this you see
    Men will be strong and free--
    Then, and not till then!

    Second: Since Adam fell,
    Have you not heard it said
    That men by women are led?
    True is the saying--true!
    See to it what you do!
    See that you lead them well.

    Third: You have work of your own!
    Maid and mother and wife,
    Look in the face of life!
    There are duties you owe the race!
    Outside your dwelling-place
    There is work for you alone!

    Maid and mother and wife,
    See your own work be done!
    Be worthy a noble son!
    Help man in the upward way!
    Truly, a girl today
    Is the strongest thing in life!




WOMEN TO MEN †


    Dear father, from my cradle I acknowledge
    All your wise kindness, tender care, and love,
    Through days of kindergarten, school and college.
    Now there is one gift lacking--one above
    All other gifts of God, this highest trust is,
    The one great gift, beyond all power and pelf--
    Give me my freedom, father; give me justice,
    That I may guard my children and myself.

    My brother, you and I were reared together;
    We played together, even-handed quite;
    We went to school in every kind of weather,
    Studied and ranked together as was right.
    We work together now and earn our living,
    You know how equal is the work we do;
    Come, brother, with the love you’re always giving,
    Give justice! It’s for me as well as you.

    And you, my lover, kneeling here before me
    With tender eyes that burn, warm lips that plead,
    Protesting that you worship, aye, adore me;
    Begging my love as life’s supremest meed,
    Vowing to make me happy. Ah, how dare you!
    Freedom and happiness have both one key!
    Lover and husband, by the love I bear you,
    Give justice! I can love you better, free!

    Son my own son! Man-child that once was lying
    All rosy, tender, helpless on my breast,
    Your strength all dimples, your stern voice but crying,
    Looking to me for comfort, food and rest,
    Asking your life of me, and not another--
    And asking not in vain till life be done--
    Oh, my boy-baby! Is it I, your mother,
    Who comes to ask of justice from her son?

    Now to the voter--tax-payer (or shirker),
    Please lay your private feelings on the shelf;
    O Man-at-large! Friend! Comrade! Fellow-worker;
    I am a human being like yourself.
    I’m not your wife and mother. Can’t be, whether
    I would or not: each to his own apart;
    But in the world we’re people altogether--
    Suffrage is not a question of the heart.

    Son--Father--Brother--Lover unsupplanted--
    We’ll talk at home. This thing concerns the nation;
    A point of justice which is to be granted
    By men to women who are no relation.
    Perceive this fact, as salient as a steeple,
    Please try to argue from it if you can;
    Women have standing-room on earth as people
    Outside of their relation to some man.

    As wife and sweetheart, daughter, sister, mother,
    Each woman privately her views explains;
    As people of America--no other--
    We claim the right our government maintains.
    You who deny it stand in history’s pages
    Withholding justice! Pitiless and plain
    Your record stands down all the brightening ages--
    You fought with progress, but you fought in vain.




REASSURANCE *


    Can you imagine nothing better, brother,
    Than that which you have always had before?
    Have you been so content with “wife and mother,”
            You dare hope nothing more?

    Have you forever prized her, praised her, sung her,
    The happy queen of a most happy reign?
    Never dishonored her, despised her, flung her
            Derision and disdain?

    Go ask the literature of all the ages!
    Books that were written before women read!
    Pagan and Christian, satirists and sages--
            Read what the world has said.

    There was no power on earth to bid you slacken
    The generous hand that painted her disgrace!
    There was no shame on earth too black to blacken
            That much-praised woman-face.

    Eve and Pandora!--always you begin it--
    The ancients called her Sin and Shame and Death.
    “There is no evil without woman in it,”
            The modern proverb saith.

    She has been yours in uttermost possession--
    Your slave, your mother, your well-chosen bride--
    And you have owned in million-fold confession,
            You were not satisfied.

    Peace then! Fear not the coming woman, brother.
    Owning herself, she giveth all the more.
    She shall be better woman, wife and mother
            Than man hath known before.




THE SOCIALIST AND THE SUFFRAGIST f


    Said the Socialist to the Suffragist:
      “My cause is greater than yours!
        You only work for a Special Class,
        We for the gain of the General Mass,
      Which every good ensures!”

    Said the Suffragist to the Socialist:
      “You underrate my Cause!
      While women remain a Subject Class,
      You never can move the General Mass,
      With your Economic Laws!”

    Said the Socialist to the Suffragist:
      “You misinterpret facts!
        There is no room for doubt or schism
        In Economic Determinism--
      It governs all our acts!”

    Said the Suffragist to the Socialist:
      “You men will always find
        That this old world will never move
        More swiftly in its ancient groove
      While women stay behind!”

    “A lifted world lifts women up,”
      The Socialist explained.
        “You cannot lift the world at all
        While half of it is kept so small,”
      The Suffragist maintained.

    The world awoke, and tartly spoke:
      “Your work is all the same:
        Work together or work apart,
        Work, each of you, with all your heart--
      Just get into the game!”




THE MALINGERER f


    Exempt! She “does not have to work!”
          So might one talk
    Defending long, bedridden ease,
    Weak yielding ankles, flaccid knees,
          With, “I don’t have to walk!”

    Not have to work. Why not? Who gave
          Free pass to you?
    You’re housed and fed and taught and dressed
    By age-long labor of the rest--
          Work other people do!

    What do you give in honest pay
          For clothes and food?--
    Then as a shield, defence, excuse,
    She offers her exclusive use--
          Her function--Motherhood!

    Is motherhood a trade you make
          A living by?
    And does the wealth you so may use,
    Squander, accumulate, abuse,
          Show motherhood as high?

    Or does the motherhood of those
          Whose toil endures,
    The farmers’ and mechanics’ wives,
    Hard working servants all their lives--
        Deserve less price than yours?

    We’re not exempt! Man’s world runs on,
          Motherless, wild;
    Our servitude and long duress,
    Our shameless, harem idleness,
          Both fail to serve the child.




THE ANTI-SUFFRAGISTS *


    Fashionable women in luxurious homes,
    With men to feed them, clothe them, pay their bills,
    Bow, doff the hat, and fetch the handkerchief;
    Hostess or guest; and always so supplied
    With graceful deference and courtesy;
    Surrounded by their horses, servants, dogs--
    These tell us they have all the rights they want.

    Successful women who have won their way
    Alone, with strength of their unaided arm,
    Or helped by friends, or softly climbing up
    By the sweet aid of “woman’s influence”;
    Successful any way, and caring naught
    For any other woman’s unsuccess--
    These tell us they have all the rights they want.

    Religious women of the feebler sort--
    Not the religion of a righteous world,
    A free, enlightened, upward-reaching world,
    But the religion that considers life
    As something to back out of!--whose ideal
    Is to renounce, submit, and sacrifice,
    Counting on being patted on the head
    And given a high chair when they get to heaven--
    These tell us they have all the rights they want.

    Ignorant women--college bred sometimes,
    But ignorant of life’s realities
    And principles of righteous government,
    And how the privileges they enjoy
    Were won with blood and tears by those before--
    Those they condemn, whose ways they now oppose;
    Saying, “Why not let well enough alone?
    Our world is very pleasant as it is”--
    These tell us they have all the rights they want.

    And selfish women--pigs in petticoats--
    Rich, poor, wise, unwise, top or bottom round,
    But all sublimely innocent of thought,
    And guiltless of ambition, save the one
    Deep, voiceless aspiration--to be fed!
    These have no use for rights or duties more.
    Duties today are more than they can meet,
    And law insures their right to clothes and food--
    These tell us they have all the rights they want.

    And, more’s the pity, some good women, too;
    Good, conscientious women with ideas;
    Who think--or think they think--that woman’s cause
    Is best advanced by letting it alone;
    That she somehow is not a human thing,
    And not to be helped on by human means,
    Just added to humanity--an “L”--
    A wing, a branch, an extra, not mankind--
    These tell us they have all the rights they want.

    And out of these has come a monstrous thing,
    A strange, down-sucking whirlpool of disgrace,
    Women uniting against womanhood,
    And using that great name to hide their sin!
    Vain are their words as that old king’s command
    Who set his will against the rising tide.
    But who shall measure the historic shame
    Of these poor traitors--traitors are they all--
    To great Democracy and Womanhood!




THE “ANTI” AND THE FLY f


    The fly upon the Cartwheel
      Thought he made all the Sound;
    He thought he made the Cart go on--
      And made the wheels go round.

    The Fly upon the Cartwheel
      Has won undying fame
    For Conceit that was colossal,
      And Ignorance the same.

    But today he has a Rival
      As we roll down History’s Track--
    For the “Anti” on the Cartwheel
      Thinks she makes the Wheels go back!




TO THE INDIFFERENT WOMEN *

A SESTINA


    You who are happy in a thousand homes,
    Or overworked therein, to a dumb peace;
    Whose souls are wholly centered in the life
    Of that small group you personally love--
    Who told you that you need not know or care
    About the sin and sorrow of the world?

    Do you believe the sorrow of the world
    Does not concern you in your little homes?
    That you are licensed to avoid the care
    And toil for human progress, human peace,
    And the enlargement of our power of love
    Until it covers every field of life?

    The one first duty of all human life
    Is to promote the progress of the world
    In righteousness, in wisdom, truth and love;
    And you ignore it, hidden in your homes,
    Content to keep them in uncertain peace,
    Content to leave all else without your care.

    Yet you are mothers! And a mother’s care
    Is the first step towards friendly human life,
    Life where all nations in untroubled peace
    Unite to raise the standard of the world
    And make the happiness we seek in homes
    Spread everywhere in strong and fruitful love.

    You are content to keep that mighty love
    In its first steps forever; the crude care
    Of animals for mate and young and homes,
    Instead of pouring it abroad in life,
    Its mighty current feeding all the world
    Till every human child shall grow in peace.

    You cannot keep your small domestic peace,
    Your little pool of undeveloped love,
    While the neglected, starved, unmothered world
    Struggles and fights for lack of mother’s care,
    And its tempestuous, bitter, broken life
    Beats in upon you in your selfish homes.

    We all may have our homes in joy and peace
    When woman’s life, in its rich power of love
    Is joined with man’s to care for all the world.




WOMEN DO NOT WANT IT *


    When the woman suffrage argument first stood upon its legs,
    They answered it with cabbages, they answered it with eggs,
    They answered it with ridicule, they answered it with scorn,
    They thought it a monstrosity that should not have been born.

    When the woman suffrage argument grew vigorous and wise,
    And was not to be answered by these opposite replies,
    They turned their opposition into reasoning severe
    Upon the limitations of our God-appointed sphere.

    We were told of disabilities--a long array of these,
    Till one could think that womanhood was merely a disease;
    And “the maternal sacrifice” was added to the plan
    Of the various sacrifices we have always made--to man.

    Religionists and scientists, in amity and bliss,
    However else they disagreed, could all agree on this,
    And the gist of all their discourse, when you got down in it,
    Was--we could not have the ballot because we were not fit!

    They would not hear the reason, they would not fairly yield,
    They would not own their arguments were beaten in the field;
    But time passed on, and someway, we need not ask them how,
    Whatever ails those arguments--we do not hear them now!

    You may talk of suffrage now with an educated man,
    And he agrees with all you say, as sweetly as he can:
    ’T would be better for us all, of course, if womanhood was free;
    But “the women do not want it”--and so it must not be!

    ’T is such a tender thoughtfulness! So exquisite a care!
    Not to pile on our frail shoulders what we do not wish to bear!
    But, oh, most generous brother! Let us look a little more--
    Have we women always wanted what you gave to us before?

    Did we ask for veils and harems in the Oriental races?
    Did we beseech to be “unclean,” shut out of sacred places?
    Did we beg for scolding bridles and ducking stools to come?
    And clamor for the beating stick no thicker than your thumb?

    Did we ask to be forbidden from all the trades that pay?
    Did we claim the lower wages for a man’s full work today?
    Have we petitioned for the laws wherein our shame is shown:
    That not a woman’s child--nor her own body--is her own?

    What women want has never been a strongly acting cause,
    When woman has been wronged by man in churches, customs, laws;
    Why should he find this preference so largely in his way,
    When he himself admits the right of what we ask today?




SONG FOR EQUAL SUFFRAGE †


    Day of hope and day of glory! After slavery and woe,
    Comes the dawn of woman’s freedom, and the light shall grow and grow
    Until every man and woman equal liberty shall know,
              In Freedom marching on!

    Woman’s right is woman’s duty! For our share in life we call!
    Our will it is not weakened and our power it is not small.
    We are half of every nation! We are mothers of them all!
              In Wisdom marching on!

    Not for self but larger service has our cry for freedom grown,
    There is crime, disease and warfare in a world of men alone,
    In the name of love we’re rising now to serve and save our own,
              As Peace comes marching on!

    By every sweet and tender tie around our heartstrings curled,
    In the cause of nobler motherhood is woman’s flag unfurled,
    Till every child shall know the joy and peace of mother’s world--
              As Love comes marching on!

    We will help to make a pruning hook of every outgrown sword,
    We will help to knit the nations in continuing accord,
    In humanity made perfect is the glory of the Lord,
              As His world goes marching on!




ANOTHER STAR f

(Suffrage Campaign Song for California)

TUNE: “Buy a Broom.”


    There are five a-light before us,
    In the flag flying o’er us,
    There’ll be six on next election--
          We bring a new star!
    We are coming like the others,
    Free Sisters, Free Brothers,
    In the pride of our affection
          For California.
    CHORUS: A ballot for the Lady!
    For the Home and for the Baby!
    Come, vote ye for the Lady,
          The Baby, the Home!

    Star of Hope and Star of Beauty!
    Of Freedom! Of Duty!
    Star of childhood’s new protection,
          That rises so high!
    We will work for it together
    In the golden, gay weather,
    And we’ll have it next election,
          Or we will know why.
    CHORUS: A ballot for the Lady!
    For the Home and for the Baby!
    Come, vote ye for the Lady,
    The Baby, the Home!




SHE WHO IS TO COME *


    A woman--in so far as she beholdeth
      Her one Beloved’s face;
    A mother--with a great heart that enfoldeth
      The children of the Race;
    A body, free and strong, with that high beauty
      That comes of perfect use, is built thereof;
    A mind where Reason ruleth over Duty,
      And Justice reigns with Love;
    A self-poised, royal soul, brave, wise and tender,
      No longer blind and dumb;
    A Human Being, of an unknown splendor,
      Is she who is to come!




BOOKS BY CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN


  In This Our World (verse)      $1.25 net
  Women and Economics             1.50  ”
  Concerning Children             1.25  ”
  The Yellow Wall Paper            .50  ”
  The Home                        1.00  ”
  Human Work                      1.00  ”
  What Diantha Did                1.00  ”
  The Man-made World              1.00  ”
  Bound Volume I, THE FORERUNNER  1.25  ”


READY, FALL OF 1911

  Moving the Mountain            $1.00 net
  The Crux                        1.00  ”

          Order of your dealer
          or from us direct

THE CHARLTON COMPANY

67 Wall Street, New York




THE FORERUNNER

          A monthly magazine, written
          edited, owned and published by

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN


REGULAR SUBSCRIPTION RATES:

           { Domestic  $1.00
  Per Year { Canadian   1.12  Per Copy, 10c.
           { Foreign    1.25

SPECIAL OFFERS:

  Trial subscription of three months                           $ .25
  One annual subscription and Bound Volume I                    2.00
  One annual subscription and one of Mrs. Gilman’s $1.00 books  1.75

For Club Rates See THE FORERUNNER

          “The Forerunner,” it is really good. This new magazine
          is by--not “edited by”--Charlotte Perkins Gilman. For
          its thirty-two pages she writes the stories, short and
          serial, the articles, the verse, the book reviews, and
          the editorials.... The miracle demands chronicling: it is
          all interesting. The views presented have as their raison
          d’être not that they are her own but that they are true. And
          with so much of “advanced” writing impossibly nebulous and
          sentimental, it is a pleasure to read matter that is clear
          and sane and entertaining withal. All of which sounds very
          improbable, but, fortunately, may be proved by any reader for
          himself.

  --_Evening Post, Chicago._


  $1.00 A YEAR      .10 A COPY





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Suffrage Songs and Verses, by 
Charlotte Perkins Gilman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUFFRAGE SONGS AND VERSES ***

***** This file should be named 56931-0.txt or 56931-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/9/3/56931/

Produced by MWS, Fay Dunn and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

