The Vikings of Helgeland: The Prose Dramas Of Henrik Ibsen, Vol. III.~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vikings of Helgeland, by Henrik Ibsen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vikings of Helgeland
       The Prose Dramas Of Henrik Ibsen, Vol. III.

Author: Henrik Ibsen

Release Date: September 8, 2006 [EBook #19205]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIKINGS OF HELGELAND ***




Produced by Douglas Levy






THE PROSE DRAMAS OF HENRIK IBSEN, VOL. III

THE VIKINGS OF HELGELAND, Translation by William Archer



THE VIKINGS OF HELGELAND. (1858.)


CHARACTERS.

ORNULF OF THE FIORDS, an Icelandic Chieftain.
SIGURD THE STRONG, a Sea-King.
GUNNAR HEADMAN,[1] a rich yeoman of Helgeland.
DAGNY, Ornulf's daughter.
HIORDIS, his foster-daughter.
KARE THE PEASANT, a Helgeland-man.
EGIL, Gunnar's son, four years old.
ORNULF'S SIX OLDER SONS.
ORNULF'S AND SIGURD'S MEN.
Guests, house-carls, serving-maids, outlaws, etc.


  The action takes place in the time of Erik Blood-axe (about A.D.
933) at, and in the neighbourhood of, Gunnar's house on the island
of Helgeland, in the north of Norway.


[PRONUNCIATION OF NAMES.--Helgeland=Helgheland; Ornulf=Ornoolf;
Sigurd=Sigoord; Gunnar=Goonar; Thorolf=Toorolf; Hiordis=Yordeess;
Kare=Koare [e,umlaut]; Egil=Ayghil. The letter o [umlaut] as in German.]

  [1] Failing to find a better equivalent for the Norwegian "Herse,"
I have used the word "Headman" wherever it seemed necessary to give
Gunnar a title or designation. He is generally spoken of as "Gunnar
Herse" in the Norwegian text; but where it could be done without
inconvenience, the designation has here been omitted.


Producer's Notes:

1. Diacritical Marks in Characters' names;
    Ornulf, umlaut above the "O".
    Hiordis, umlaut above the "o".
    Kare, ring above the "A".
2. All the text inside parentheses in the original is printed in
   italics, save for the characters' names. I've eliminated the
   usual markings indicating _italics_ for the sake of readability.
   --D. L.



THE VIKINGS OF HELGELAND.


PLAY IN FOUR ACTS.


ACT FIRST.


(A rocky coast, running precipitously down to the sea at the back.
  To the left, a boat-house; to the right, rocks and pine-woods. The
  masts of two war-ships can be seen down in the cove. Far out to
  the right, the ocean, dotted with reefs and rocky islands; the sea
  is running high; it is a stormy snow-grey winter day.)

(SIGURD comes up from the ships; he is clad in a white tunic with a
  silver belt, a blue cloak, cross-gartered hose, untanned shoes, and
  a steel cap; at his side hangs a short sword. ORNULF comes in sight
  immediately afterwards, up among the rocks, clad in a dark lamb-skin
  tunic with a breastplate and greaves, woollen stockings, and untanned
  shoes; over his shoulders he has a cloak of brown frieze, with the
  hood drawn over his steel cap, so that his face is partly hidden.
  He is very tall, and massively built, with a long white beard, but
  somewhat bowed by age; his weapons are a round shield, sword, and
  spear.


  SIGURD (enters first, looks around, sees the boat-shed, goes quickly
up to it, and tries to burst open the door.)

  ORNULF (appears among the rocks, starts on seeing SIGURD, seems to
recognise him, descends and cries:) Give place, Viking!

  SIGURD (turns, lays his hand on his sword, and answers:) 'Twere the
first time if I did!

  ORNULF. Thou shalt and must! I have need of the shelter for my
stiff-frozen men.

  SIGURD. Then must outlaws be highly prized in Helgeland!

  ORNULF. Dearly shalt thou aby that word!

  SIGURD. Now will it go ill with thee, old man!

    (ORNULF rushes upon him; SIGURD defends himself.)
    (DAGNY and some of SIGURD'S men come up from the strand; Ornulf's
      six sons appear on the rocks to the right.)

  DAGNY (who is a little in front, clad in a red kirtle, blue cloak,
and fur hood, calls down to the ships:) Up, all Sigurd's men! My
husband is fighting with a stranger!

  ORNULF'S SONS. Help for Ornulf! (They descend.)

  SIGURD (to his men). Hold! I can master him alone!

  ORNULF (to his sons). Let me fight in peace! (Rushes in upon
SIGURD.) I will see thy blood!

  SIGURD. First see thine own! (Wounds him in the arm so that his
spear falls.)

  ORNULF. A stout stroke, Viking!
          Swift the sword thou swingest,
          keen thy blows and biting;
          Sigurd's self, the Stalwart,
          stood before thee shame-struck.

  SIGURD (smiling). Then were his shame his glory!

  ORNULF'S SONS (with a cry of wonder). Sigurd himself! Sigurd
the Strong!

  ORNULF. But sharper was thy stroke that night thou didst bear away
Dagny, my daughter. (Casts his hood back.)

  SIGURD AND HIS MEN. Ornulf of the Fiords!

  DAGNY (glad, yet uneasy). My father and my brothers!

  SIGURD. Stand thou behind me.

  ORNULF. Nay, no need. (Approaching SIGURD.) I knew thy face as
soon as I was ware of thee, and therefore I stirred the strife; I
was fain to prove the fame that tells of thee as the stoutest man
of his hands in Norway. Henceforth let peace be between us.

  SIGURD. Best if so it could be.

  ORNULF. Here is my hand. Thou art a warrior indeed; stouter strokes
than these has old Ornulf never given or taken.

  SIGURD (seizes his outstretched hand). Let them be the last strokes
given and taken between us two; and do thou thyself adjudge the matter
between us. Art thou willing?

  ORNULF. That am I, and straightway shall the quarrel be healed.
(To the others.) Be the matter, then, known to all. Five winters
ago came Sigurd and Gunnar Headman as vikings to Iceland; they lay
in harbour close under my homestead. Then Gunnar, by force and craft,
carried away my foster-daughter, Hiordis; but thou, Sigurd, didst take
Dagny, my own child, and sailed with her over the sea. For that thou
art now doomed to pay three hundred pieces of silver, and thereby
shall thy misdeed be atoned.

  SIGURD. Fair is thy judgment, Ornulf; the three hundred pieces will
I pay, and add thereto a silken cloak fringed with gold. It is a gift
from King AEthelstan of England, and better has no Icelander yet borne.

  DAGNY. So be it, my brave husband; and my father, I thank thee. Now
at last is my mind at ease.

    (She presses her father's and brothers' hands, and talks low
      to them.)

  ORNULF. Then thus stands the treaty between us; and from this day
shall Dagny be to the full as honourably regarded as though she had
been lawfully betrothed to thee, with the good will of her kin.

  SIGURD. And in me canst thou trust, as in one of thine own blood.

  ORNULF. That doubt I not; and see! I will forthwith prove thy
friendship.

  SIGURD. Ready shalt thou find me; say, what dost thou crave?

  ORNULF. Thy help in rede and deed. I have sailed hither to
Helgeland to seek out Gunnar Headman and draw him to reckoning
for the carrying away of Hiordis.

  SIGURD (surprised). Gunnar!

  DAGNY (in the same tone). And Hiordis--where are they?

  ORNULF. In Gunnar's homestead, I ween.

  SIGURD. And it is----?

  ORNULF. Not many bow-shots hence; did ye not know?

  SIGURD (with suppressed emotion). No, truly. Small tidings have I
had of Gunnar since we sailed from Iceland together. I have wandered
far and wide and served many outland kings, while Gunnar sat at home.
Hither we drive at day-dawn before the storm; I knew, indeed, that
Gunnar's homestead lay here in the north, but----

  DAGNY (to ORNULF). So _that_ errand has brought thee hither?

  ORNULF. That and no other. (To SIGURD.) Our meeting is the work
of the Mighty Ones above; they willed it so. Had I wished to find
thee, little knew I where to seek.

  SIGURD (thoughtfully). True, true!--But concerning Gunnar--tell me,
Ornulf, art thou minded to go sharply to work, with all thy might, be
it for good or ill?

  ORNULF. That must I. Listen, Sigurd, for thus it stands: Last
summer I rode to the Council where many honourable men were met.
When the Council-days were over, I sat in the hall and drank with
the men of my hundred, and the talk fell upon the carrying-away of
the women; scornful words they gave me, because I had let that wrong
rest unavenged. Then, in my wrath, I swore to sail to Norway, seek
out Gunnar, and crave reckoning or revenge, and never again to set
foot in Iceland till my claim was made good.

  SIGURD. Ay, ay, since so it stands, I see well that if need be the
matter must be pressed home.

  ORNULF. It must; but I shall not crave over much, and Gunnar has
the fame of an honourable man. Glad am I, too, that I set about this
quest; the time lay heavy on me in Iceland; out upon the blue waters
had I grown old and grey, and I longed to fare forth once again before
I----; well well--Bergthora, my good wife, was dead these many years;
my eldest sons sailed on viking-ventures summer by summer; and since
Thorolf was growing up----

  DAGNY (gladly). Thorolf is with thee? Where is he?

  ORNULF. On board the ship. (Points towards the background, to the
right.) Scarce shalt thou know the boy again, so stout and strong and
fair has he grown. He will be a mighty warrior, Sigurd; one day he
will equal thee.

  DAGNY (smiling). I see it is now as ever; Thorolf stands nearest
thy heart.

  ORNULF. He is the youngest, and like his mother; therefore it is.

  SIGURD. But tell me--thy errand to Gunnar--thinkest thou to-day----?

  ORNULF. Rather to-day than to-morrow. Fair amends will content me;
if Gunnar says me nay, then must he take what comes.

    (KARE THE PEASANT enters hastily from the right; he is clad in a
      grey frieze cloak and low-brimmed felt hat; he carries in his
      hand a broken fence-rail.)

  KARE. Well met, Vikings!

  ORNULF. Vikings are seldom well met.

  KARE. If ye be honourable men, ye will grant me refuge among you;
Gunnar Headman's house-carls are hunting me to slay me.

  ORNULF. Gunnar's?

  SIGURD. Then has thou done him some wrong!

  KARE. I have done myself right. Our cattle fed together upon an
island, hard by the coast; Gunnar's men carried off my best oxen, and
one of them flouted me for a thrall. Then bare I arms against him and
slew him.

  ORNULF. That was a lawful deed.

  KARE. But this morning his men came in wrath against me. By good
hap I heard of their coming, and fled; but my foemen are on my tracks,
and short shrift can I look for at their hands.

  SIGURD. Ill can I believe thee, peasant! In bygone days I knew
Gunnar as I know myself, and this I wot, that never did he wrong
a peaceful man.

  KARE. Gunnar has no part in this wrong-doing; he is in the south-
land; nay, it is Hiordis his wife----

  DAGNY. Hiordis!

  ORNULF (to himself). Ay, ay, 'tis like her!

  KARE. I offered Gunnar amends for the thrall, and he was willing;
but then came Hiordis, and egged her husband on with scornful words,
and hindered the peace. Since then has Gunnar gone to the south,
and to-day----

  SIGURD (looking out to the left). Here come wayfarers northward.
Is it not----?

  KARE. It is Gunnar himself!

  ORNULF. Be of good heart; methinks I can make peace between you.

    (GUNNAR HEADMAN, with several men, enters from the left. He is in
      a brown tunic, cross-gartered hose, a blue mantle, and a broad
      hat; he has no weapon but a small axe.)

  GUNNAR (stops in surprise and uncertainty on seeing the knot of men).
Ornulf of the Fiords! Yes, it is----!

  ORNULF. Thou seest aright.

  GUNNAR (approaching). Then peace and welcome to thee in my land, if
thou come in peace.

  ORNULF. If thy will be as mine, there shall be no strife between us.

  SIGURD (standing forward). Well met, Gunnar!

  GUNNAR (gladly). Sigurd--foster-brother! (Shakes his hand.) Now
truly, since thou art here, I know that Ornulf comes in peace. (To
ORNULF.) Give me thy hand, greybeard! Thy errand here in the north
is lightly guessed: it has to do with Hiordis, thy foster-daughter.

  ORNULF. As thou sayest; great wrong was done me when thou didst bear
her away from Iceland without my will.

  GUNNAR. Thy claim is just; what youth has marred, the man must mend.
Long have I looked for thee, Ornulf, for this cause; and if amends
content thee, we shall soon be at one.

  SIGURD. So deem I too. Ornulf will not press thee hard.

  GUNNAR (warmly). Nay, Ornulf, didst thou crave her full worth, all
my goods would not suffice.

  ORNULF. I shall go by law and usage, be sure of that. But now
another matter. (Pointing to KARE.) Seest thou yonder man?

  GUNNAR. Kare! (To ORNULF.) Thou knowest, then, that there is a
strife between us?

  ORNULF. Thy men have stolen his cattle, and theft must be atoned.

  GUNNAR. Murder no less; he has slain my thrall.

  KARE. Because he flouted me.

  GUNNAR. I have offered thee terms of peace.

  KARE. But that had Hiordis no mind to, and this morning, whilst thou
wert gone, she fell upon me and hunts me now to my death.

  GUNNAR (angrily). Is it true what thou sayest? Has she----?

  KARE. True, every word.

  ORNULF. Therefore the peasant besought me to stand by him, and that
will I do.

  GUNNAR (after a moment's thought). Honourably hast thou dealt with
me, Ornulf; therefore is it fit that I should yield to thy will. Hear
then, Kare: I am willing to let the slaying of the thrall and the
wrongs done toward thee quit each other.

  KARE (gives GUNNAR his hand). It is a good offer; I am content.

  ORNULF. And he shall have peace for thee and thine?

  GUNNAR. Peace shall he have, here and overall.

  SIGURD (pointing to the right). See yonder!

  GUNNAR (disturbed). It is Hiordis!

  ORNULF. With armed men!

  KARE. She is seeking me!

    (HIORDIS enters, with a troop of house-carls. She is clad in
      black, wearing a kirtle, cloak, and hood; the men are armed
      with swords and axes; she herself carries a light spear.)

  HIORDIS (stops on entering). A meeting of many, meseems.

  DAGNY (rushes to meet her). Peace and joy to thee, Hiordis!

  HIORDIS (coldly). Thanks. It was told me that thou wast not far
off. (Comes forward, looking sharply at those assembled.) Gunnar,
and--Kare, my foeman--Ornulf and his sons and---- (As she catches
sight of SIGURD, she starts almost imperceptibly, is silent a moment,
but collects herself and says:) Many I see here who are known to me--
but little I know who is best minded towards me.

  ORNULF. We are all well-minded towards thee.

  HIORDIS. If so be, thou wilt not deny to give Kare into my
husband's hands.

  ORNULF. There is no need.

  GUNNAR. There is peace and friendship between us.

  HIORDIS (with suppressed scorn). Friendship? Well well, I know thou
art a wise man, Gunnar! Kare has met mighty friends, and well I woth
thou deem'st it safest----

  GUNNAR. Thy taunts avail not! (With dignity.) Kare is at peace
with us!

  HIORDIS (restraining herself). Well and good; if thou hast sworn
him peace, the vow must be held.

  GUNNAR (forcibly, but without anger). It must and it shall.

  ORNULF (to HIORDIS). Another pact had been well-nigh made ere
thy coming.

  HIORDIS (sharply). Between thee and Gunnar.

  ORNULF (nods). It had to do with thee.

  HIORDIS. Well can I guess what it had to do with; but this I tell
thee, foster-father, never shall it be said that Gunnar let himself
be cowed because thou camest in arms to the isle. Hadst thou come
alone, a single wayfarer, to our hall, the quarrel had more easily
been healed.

  GUNNAR. Ornulf and his sons come in peace.

  HIORDIS. Mayhap; but otherwise will it sound in the mouths of
men; and thou thyself, Gunnar, didst show scant trust in the peace
yesterday, in sending our son Egil to the southland so soon as it
was known that Ornulf's warship lay in the fiord.

  SIGURD (to GUNNAR). Didst thou send thy sons to the south?

  HIORDIS. Ay, that he might be in safety should Ornulf fall upon us.

  ORNULF. Scoff not at that, Hiordis; what Gunnar has done may prove
wise in the end, if so be thou hinderest the pact.

  HIORDIS. Life must take its chance; come what will, I had liever
die than save my life by a shameful pact.

  DAGNY. Sigurd makes atonement, and will not be deemed the lesser
man for that.

  HIORDIS. Sigurd best knows what his own honour can bear.

  SIGURD. On that score shall I never need reminding.

  HIORDIS. Sigurd has done famous deeds, but the boldest deed of all
was Gunnar's, when he slew the white bear that guarded my bower.

  GUNNAR (with an embarrassed glance at SIGURD). Nay nay, no more
of that!

  ORNULF. In truth it was the boldest deed that e'er was seen in
Iceland; and therefore----

  SIGURD. The more easily can Gunnar yield, and not be deemed
a coward.

  HIORDIS. If amends are to be made, amends shall also be craved.
Bethink thee, Gunnar, of thy vow!

  GUNNAR. That vow was ill bethought; wilt thou hold me to it?

  HIORDIS. That will I, if we two are to dwell under one roof after
this day. Know then, Ornulf, that if atonement is to be made for the
carrying away of thy foster-daughter, thou, too, must atone for the
slaying of Jokul my father, and the seizure of his goods and gear.

  ORNULF. Jokul was slain in fair fight;[1] thy kinsmen did me a
worse wrong when they sent thee to Iceland and entrapped me into
adopting[2] thee, unwitting who thou wast.

    [1] "I aerling holmgang." The established form of duel in the
  viking times was to land the combatants on one of the rocky islets
  or "holms" that stud the Norwegian coast, and there let them fight
  it out. Hence "holmgang"=duel.
    [2] "At knaessette"=to knee-set a child, to take it on one's knee,
  an irrevocable form of adoption.

  HIORDIS. Honour, and now wrong, befell thee in adopting
Jokul's daughter.

  ORNULF. Nought but strife hast thou brought me, that I know.

  HIORDIS. Sterner strife may be at hand, if----

  ORNULF. I came not hither to bandy words with women!--Gunnar, hear
my last word: art willing to make atonement?

  HIORDIS (to GUNNAR). Think of thy vow!

  GUNNAR (to ORNULF). Thou hearest, I have sworn a vow, and that
must I----

  ORNULF (irritated). Enough, enough! Never shall it be said that I
made atonement for slaying in fair fight.

  HIORDIS (forcibly). Then we bid defiance to thee and thine.

  ORNULF (in rising wrath). And who has the right to crave atonement
for Jokul? Where are his kinsmen? There is none alive! Where is his
lawful avenger?

  HIORDIS. That is Gunnar, on my behalf.

  ORNULF. Gunnar! Ay, hadst thou been betrothed to him with thy
foster-father's good-will, or had he made atonement for carrying
thee away, then were he thy father's lawful avenger; but----

  DAGNY (apprehensive and imploring). Father, father!

  SIGURD (quickly). Do not speak it!

  ORNULF (raising his voice). Nay, loudly shall it be spoken! A
woman wedded by force has no lawful husband!

  GUNNAR (vehemently). Ornulf!

  HIORDIS (in a wild outburst). Flouted and shamed! (In a quivering
voice.) This--this shalt thou come to rue!

  ORNULF (continuing). A woman wedded by force is lawfully no more
than a leman! Wilt thou regain thine honour, then must thou----

  HIORDIS (controlling herself). Nay, Ornulf, I know better what is
fitting. If I am to be held as Gunnar's leman--well and good, then
must he win me honour by his deeds--by deeds so mighty that my shame
shall be shame no more! And thou, Ornulf, beware! Here our ways part,
and from this day I shall make war upon thee and thine whensoever and
wheresoever it may be; thou shalt know no safety, thou, or any whom
thou---- (Looking fiercely at KARE.) Kare! Ornulf has stood thy
friend, forsooth, and there is peace between us; but I counsel thee
not to seek thy home yet awhile; the man thou slewest has many
avengers, and it well might befall---- See, I have shown thee the
danger; thou must e'en take what follows. Come, Gunnar, we must gird
ourselves for the fight. A famous deed didst thou achieve in Iceland,
but greater deeds must here be done, if thou wouldst not have thy--
thy leman shrink with shame from thee and from herself!

  GUNNAR. Curb thyself, Hiordis; it is unseemly to bear thee thus.

  DAGNY (imploringly). Stay, foster-sister--stay; I will appease
my father.

  HIORDIS (without listening to her). Homewards, homewards! Who could
have foretold me that I should wear out my life as a worthless leman?
But if I am to bear this life of shame, ay, even a single day longer,
then must my husband do such a deed--such a deed as shall make his name
more famous than all other names of men.

    (Goes out to the right.)

  GUNNAR (softly). Sigurd, this thou must promise me, that we shall
have speech together ere thou leave the land.

    (Goes out with his men to the right.)
    (The storm has meanwhile ceased; the mid-day sun is now visible,
      like a red disc, low upon the rim of the sea.)

  ORNULF (threateningly). Dearly shalt thou aby this day's work,
foster-daughter!

  DAGNY. Father, father! Surely thou wilt not harm her!

  ORNULF. Let me be! Now, Sigurd, now can no amends avail between
Gunnar and me.

  SIGURD. What thinkest thou to do?

  ORNULF. That I know not; but far and wide shall the tale be told
how Ornulf of the Fiords came to Gunnar's hall.

  SIGURD (with quiet determination). That may be; but this I tell
thee, Ornulf, that thou shalt never bear arms against him so long
as I am alive.

  ORNULF. So, so! And what if it be my will to?

  SIGURD. It shall not be--let thy will be never so strong.

  ORNULF (angrily). Go then; join thou with my foes; I can match the
twain of you!

  SIGURD. Hear me out, Ornulf; the day shall never dawn that shall
see thee and me at strife. There is honourable peace between us,
Dagny is dearer to me than weapons or gold, and never shall I forget
that thou art her nearest kinsman.

  ORNULF. There I know thee again, brave Sigurd!

  SIGURD. But Gunnar is my foster-brother; faith and friendship have
we sworn each other. Both in war and peace have we faced fortune
together, and of all men he is dearest to me. Stout though he be, he
loves not war;--but as for me, ye know, all of you, that I shrink not
from strife; yet here I stand forth, Ornulf, and pray for peace on
Gunnar's behalf. Let me have my will!

  ORNULF. I cannot; I should be a scoff to all brave men, were I to
fare empty-handed back to Iceland.

  SIGURD. Empty-handed shalt thou not fare. Here in the cove my two
long-ships are lying, with all the wealth I have won in my viking-
ventures. There are many costly gifts from outland kings, good
weapons by the chestful, and other priceless chattels. Take thou one
of the ships; choose which thou wilt, and it shall be thine with all
it contains--be that the atonement for Hiordis, and let Gunnar be
at peace.

  ORNULF. Brave Sigurd, wilt thou do this for Gunnar?

  SIGURD. For a faithful friend, no man can do too much.

  ORNULF. Give half thy goods and gear!

  SIGURD (urgently). Take the whole, take both my ships, take all
that is mine, and let me fare with thee to Iceland as the poorest
man in thy train. What I give, I can win once more; but if thou and
Gunnar come to strife, I shall never see a glad day again. Now Ornulf,
thy answer?

  ORNULF (reflecting). Two good long-ships, weapons and other chattels
--too much gear can no man have;  but---- (vehemently) no, no!--
Hiordis has threatened me; I will not! It were shameful for me to
take thy goods!

  SIGURD. Yet listen----

  ORNULF. No, I say! I must fight my own battle, be my fortune what
it may.

  KARE (approaching). Right friendly is Sigurd's rede, but if thou
wilt indeed fight thine own battle with all thy might, I can counsel
thee better. Dream not of atonement so long as Hiordis has aught to
say; but revenge can be thine if thou wilt hearken to me.

  ORNULF. Revenge? What dost thou counsel?

  SIGURD. Evil, I can well see.

  DAGNY (to ORNULF). Oh, do not hear him!

  KARE. Hiordis has declared me an outlaw; with cunning will she seek
to take my life; do thou swear to see me scatheless, and this night
will I burn Gunnar's hall and all within it. Is that to thy mind?

  SIGURD. Dastard!

  ORNULF (quietly). To my mind? Knowest thou, Kare, what were more
to my mind? (In a voice of thunder.) To hew off thy nose and ears,
thou vile thrall. Little dost thou know old Ornulf if thou thinkest
to have his help in such a deed of shame!

  KARE (who has shrunk backwards). If thou fall not upon Gunnar he
will surely fall upon thee.

  ORNULF. Have I not weapons, and strength to wield them?

  SIGURD (to KARE). And now away with thee! Thy presence is a shame
to honourable men!

  KARE (going off). Well well, I must shield myself as best I can.
But this I tell you: if ye think to deal gently with Hiordis, ye will
come to rue it; I know her--and I know where to strike her sorest!

    (Goes down towards the shore.)

  DAGNY. He is plotting revenge. Sigurd, it must be hindered!

  ORNULF (with annoyance). Nay, let him do as he will; she is worth
no better!

  DAGNY. That meanest thou not; bethink thee she is thy foster-child.

  ORNULF. Woe worth the day when I took her under my roof! Jokul's
words are coming true.

  SIGURD. Jokul's?

  ORNULF. Ay, her father's. When I gave him his death-wound he fell
back upon the sward, and fixed his eyes on on me and sang:--

       Jokul's kin for Jokul's slayer
       many a woe shall still be weaving;
       Jokul's hoard whoe'er shall harry
       heartily shall rue his rashness.

When he had sung that, he was silent a while, and laughed; and thereupon
he died.

  SIGURD. Why should'st thou heed his words?

  ORNULF. Who knows? The story goes, and many believe it, that Jokul
gave his children a wolf's heart to eat, that they might be fierce and
fell; and Hiordis has surely had her share, that one can well see.
(Breaks off, on looking out towards the right.) Gunnar!--Are we two
to meet again!

  GUNNAR (enters). Ay, Ornulf, think of me what thou wilt, but I
cannot part from thee as thy foe.

  ORNULF. What is thy purpose?

  GUNNAR. To hold out the hand of fellowship to thee ere thou depart.
Hear me all of you: go with me to my homestead, and be my guests as
long as ye will. We lack not meat or drink or sleeping-room, and there
shall be no talk of our quarrel either to-day or to-morrow.

  SIGURD. But Hiordis----?

  GUNNAR. Yields to my will; she changed her thought on the homeward
way, and deemed, as I did, that we would soon be at one if ye would
but be our guests.

  DAGNY. Yes, yes; let it be so.

  SIGURD (doubtfully). But I know not whether----

  DAGNY. Gunnar is thy foster-brother; little I know thee if thou
say him nay.

  GUNNAR (to SIGURD). Thou hast been my friend where'er we fared;
thou wilt not stand against me now.

  DAGNY. And to depart from the land, leaving Hiordis with hate in
her heart--no, no, that must we not!

  GUNNAR. I have done Ornulf a great wrong; until it is made good, I
cannot be at peace with myself.

  SIGURD (vehemently). All else will I do for thee, Gunnar, but not
stay here! (Mastering himself.) I am in King AEthelstan's service,
and I must be with him in England ere the winter is out.

  DAGNY. But that thou canst be, nevertheless.

  GUNNAR. No man can know what lot awaits him; mayhap this is our
last meeting, Sigurd, and thou wilt repent that thou didst not stand
by me to the end.

  DAGNY. And long will it be ere thou see me glad again, if thou set
sail to-day.

  SIGURD (determined). Well, be it so! It shall be as ye will,
although---- But no more of that; here is my hand; I will stay
to feast with thee and Hiordis.

  GUNNAR (shakes his hand). Thanks, Sigurd, I never doubted thee.--And
thou, Ornulf, dost thou say likewise?

  ORNULF (unappeased). I shall think upon it. Bitterly has Hiordis
wounded me;--I will not answer to-day.

  GUNNAR. It is well, old warrior; Sigurd and Dagny will know how to
soothe thy brow. Now must I prepare the feast; peace be with you the
while, and well met in my hall! (Goes out by the right.)

  SIGURD (to himself). Hiordis has changed her thought, said he?
Little he knows her; I rather deem that she is plotting----
(interrupting himself and turning to his men.) Come, follow me all
to the ships; good gifts will I choose for Gunnar and his household.

  DAGNY. Gifts of the best we have. And thou, father--thou shalt
have no peace for me until thou yield thee. (She goes with SIGURD
and his men down towards the shore at the back.)

  ORNULF. Yield me? Ay, if there were no women-folk in Gunnar's house,
then---- Oh, if I but knew how to pierce her armour!--Thorolf, thou
here!

  THOROLF (who has entered hastily). As thou seest. Is it true that
thou hast met with Gunnar?

  ORNULF. Yes.

  THOROLF. And art at enmity with him?

  ORNULF. Hm--at least with Hiordis.

  THOROLF. Then be of good cheer; soon shalt thou be avenged!

  ORNULF. Avenged? Who shall avenge me?

  THOROLF. Listen: as I stood on board the ship, there came a man
running, with a staff in his hand, and called to me: "If thou be of
Ornulf's shipfolk, then greet him from Kare the Peasant, and say that
now am I avenging the twain of us." Thereupon he took a boat and
rowed away, saying as he passed: "Twenty outlaws are at haven in the
fiord; with them I fare southward, and ere eventide shall Hiordis
be childless."

  ORNULF. He said that! Ha, now I understand; Gunnar has sent his
son away; Kare is at feud with him----

  THOROLF. And now he is rowing southward to slay the boy!

  ORNULF (with sudden resolution). Up all! That booty will we
fight for!

  THOROLF. What wilt thou do?

  ORNULF. Ask me not; it shall be I, and not Kare, that will take
revenge!

  THOROLF. I will go with thee!

  ORNULF. Nay, do thou follow with Sigurd and thy sister to Gunnar's
hall.

  THOROLF. Sigurd? Is he in the isle?

  ORNULF. There may'st thou see his warships; we are at one--do thou
go with him.

  THOROLF. Among thy foes?

  ORNULF. Go thou to the feast. Now shall Hiordis learn to know old
Ornulf! But hark thee, Thorolf, to no one must thou speak of what I
purpose; dost hear? to no one!

  THOROLF. I promise.

  ORNULF (takes his hand and looks at him affectionately). Farewell
then, my fair boy; bear thee in courtly wise at the feast-house, that
I may have honour of thee. Beware of idle babbling; but what thou
sayest, let it be keen as a sword. Be friendly to those that deal
with thee in friendly wise; but if thou be taunted, hold not thy peace.
Drink not more than thou canst bear; but put not the horn aside when
it is offered thee in measure, lest thou be deemed womanish.

  THOROLF. Nay, be at ease.

  ORNULF. Then away to the feast at Gunnar's hall. I too will come
to the feast, and that in the guise they least think of. (Blithely
to the rest.) Come, my wolf-cubs; be your fangs keen;--now shall ye
have blood to drink.

    (He goes off with his elder sons to the right, at the back.)
    (SIGURD and DAGNY come up from the ships, richly dressed for the
      banquet. They are followed by two men, carrying a chest, who
      lay it down and return as they came.)

  THOROLF (looking out after his father). Now fare they all forth to
fight, and I must stay behind; it is hard to be the youngest of the
house.--Dagny! all hail and greetings to thee, sister mine!

  DAGNY. Thorolf! All good powers!--thou art a man, grown!

  THOROLF. That may I well be, forsooth, in five years----

  DAGNY. Ay, true, true.

  SIGURD (giving his his hand). In thee will Ornulf find a stout
carl, or I mistake me.

  THOROLF. Would he but prove me----!

  DAGNY (smiling). He spares thee more than thou hast a mind to? Thou
wast ever well-nigh too dear to him.

  SIGURD. Whither has he gone?

  THOROLF. Down to his ships;--he will return ere long.

  SIGURD. I await my men; they are mooring my ships and bringing
ashore wares.

  THOROLF. There must I lend a hand!

    (Goes down towards the shore.)

  SIGURD (after a moment's reflection). Dagny, my wife, we are alone;
I have that to tell thee which must no longer be hidden.

  DAGNY (surprised). What meanest thou?

  SIGURD. There may be danger in this faring to Gunnar's hall.

  DAGNY. Danger? Thinkest thou that Gunnar----?

  SIGURD. Nay, Gunnar is brave and true--yet better had it been that
I had sailed from the isle without crossing his threshold.

  DAGNY. Thou makest me fear! Sigurd, what is amiss?

  SIGURD. First answer me this: the golden ring that I gave thee,
where hast thou it?

  DAGNY (showing it). Here, on my arm; thou badest me wear it.

  SIGURD. Cast it to the bottom of the sea, so deep that none may
ever set eyes on it again; else may it be the bane of many men.

  DAGNY. The ring!

  SIGURD (in a low voice). That evening when we carried away thy
father's daughters--dost remember it?

  DAGNY. Do I remember it!

  SIGURD. It is of that I would speak.

  DAGNY (in suspense). What is it? Say on!

  SIGURD. Thou knowest there had been a feast; thou didst seek thy
chamber betimes; but Hiordis still sat among the men in the feast-hall.
The horn went busily round, and many a great vow was sworn. I swore
to bear away a fair maid with me from Iceland; Gunnar swore the same
as I, and passed the cup to Hiordis. She grasped it and stood up, and
vowed this vow, that no warrior should have her to wife, save he who
should go to her bower, slay the white bear that stood bound at the
door, and carry her away in his arms.

  DAGNY. Yes, yes; all this I know!

  SIGURD. All men deemed that it might not be, for the bear was the
fiercest of beasts; none but Hiordis might come near it, and it had
the strength of twenty men.

  DAGNY. But Gunnar slew it, and by that deed won fame throughout
all lands.

  SIGURD (in a low voice). He won the fame--but--_I_ did the deed!

  DAGNY (with a cry). Thou!

  SIGURD. When the men left the feast-hall, Gunnar prayed me to come
with him alone to our sleeping-place. Then said he: "Hiordis is dearer
to me than all women; without her I cannot live." I answered him:
"Then go to her bower; thou knowest the vow she hath sworn." But he
said: "Life is dear to him that loves; if I should assail the bear,
the end were doubtful, and I am loath to lose my life, for then should
I lose Hiordis too." Long did we talk, and the end was that Gunnar
made ready his ship, while I drew my sword, donned Gunnar's harness,
and went to the bower.

  DAGNY (with pride and joy). And thou--thou didst slay the bear!

  SIGURD. I slew him. In the bower it was dark as under a raven's
wing; Hiordis deemed it was Gunnar that sat by her--she was heated
with the mead--she drew a ring from her arm and gave it to me--it
is that thou wearest now.

  DAGNY (hesitating). And thou didst pass the night with Hiordis in
her bower?

  SIGURD. My sword lay drawn between us. (A short pause.) Ere the
dawn, I bore Hiordis to Gunnar's ship; she dreamed not or our wiles,
and he sailed away with her. Then went I to thy sleeping-place and
found thee there among thy women;--what followed, thou knowest; I
sailed from Iceland with a fair maid, as I had sworn, and from that
day hast thou stood faithfully at my side whithersoever I might wander.

  DAGNY (much moved). My brave husband! And that great deed was
thine!--Oh, I should have known it; none but thou would have dared!
Hiordis, that proud and stately woman, couldst thou have won, yet
didst choose me! Now wouldst thou be tenfold dearer to me, wert
thou not already dearer than all the world.

  SIGURD. Dagny, my sweet wife, now thou knowest all--that is needful.
I could not but warn thee; for that ring--Hiordis must never set eyes
on it! Wouldst thou do my will, then cast it from thee--into the
depths of the sea.

  DAGNY. Nay, Sigurd, it is too dear to me; is it not thy gift? But
be thou at ease, I shall hide it from every eye, and never shall I
breathe a word of what thou hast told me.

    (THOROLF comes up from the ships, with SIGURD'S men.)

  THOROLF. All is ready for the feast.

  DAGNY. Come then, Sigurd--my brave, my noble warrior!

  SIGURD. Beware, Dagny--beware! It rests with thee now whether this
meeting shall end peacefully or in bloodshed. (Cheerfully to the
others.) Away then, to the feast in Gunnar's hall!

    (Goes out with DAGNY to the right; the others follow.)



ACT SECOND.


(The feast-room in GUNNAR'S house. The entrance-door is in the back;
  smaller doors in the side-walls. In front, on the left, the greater
  high-seat; opposite it on the right, the lesser. In the middle of the
  floor, a wood fire is burning on a built-up hearth. In the background,
  on both sides of the door, are daises for the women of the household.
  From each of the high-seats, a long table, with benches, stretches
  backwards, parallel with the wall. It is dark outside; the fire
  lights the room.)


    (HIORDIS and DAGNY enter from the right.)

  DAGNY. Nay, Hiordis, I cannot understand thee. Thou hast shown me
all the house; I know not what thing thou lackest, and all thou hast
is fair and goodly;--then why bemoan thy lot?

  HIORDIS. Cage an eagle and it will bite at the wires, be they of
iron or of gold.

  DAGNY. In one thing at least thou art richer than I; thou hast Egil,
thy little son.

  HIORDIS. Better no child, than one born in shame.

  DAGNY. In shame?

  HIORDIS. Dost thou forgot thy father's saying? Egil is the son of
a leman; that was his word.

  DAGNY. A word spoken in wrath--why wilt thou heed it?

  HIORDIS. Nay, nay, Ornulf was right; Egil is weak; one can see he
is no freeborn child.

  DAGNY. Hiordis, how canst thou----?

  HIORDIS (unheeding). Thus is shame sucked into the blood, like the
venom of a snake-bite. Of another mettle are the freeborn sons of
mighty men. I have heard of a queen that took her son and sewed his
kirtle fast to his flesh, yet he never blinked an eye. (With a look
of cruelty.) Dagny, that will I try with Egil!

  DAGNY (horrified). Hiordis, Hiordis!

  HIORDIS (laughing). Ha-ha-ha! Dost thou think I meant my words?
(Changing her tone.) But, believe me or not as thou wilt, there are
times when such deeds seem to lure me; it must run in the blood,--
for I am of the race of the Jotuns,[1] they say.--Come, sit thou here,
Dagny. Far hast thou wandered in these five long years; tell me, thou
hast ofttimes been a guest in the halls of kings?

    [1] The giants or Titans of Scandinavian mythology.

  DAGNY. Many a time--and chiefly with AEthelstan of England.

  HIORDIS. And everywhere thou hast been held in honour, and hast sat
in the highest seats at the board?

  DAGNY. Doubtless. As Sigurd's wife----

  HIORDIS. Ay, ay--a famous man is Sigurd--though Gunnar stands
above him.

  DAGNY. Gunnar?

  HIORDIS. One deed did Gunnar do that Sigurd shrank from. But let
that be! Tell me, when thou didst go a-viking with Sigurd, when thou
didst hear the sword-blades sing in the fierce war-game, when the
blood streamed red on the deck--came there not over thee an untameable
longing to plunge into the strife? Didst thou not don harness and
take up arms?

  DAGNY. Never! How canst thou think it? I, a woman!

  HIORDIS. A woman, a woman,--who knows what a woman may do!--But one
thing thou canst tell me, Dagny, for that thou surely knowest: when a
man clasps to his breast the woman he loves--is it true that her blood
burns, that her bosom throbs--that she swoons in a shuddering ecstasy?

  DAGNY (blushing). Hiordis, how canst thou----!

  HIORDIS. Come, tell me----!

  DAGNY. Surely thou thyself hast known it.

  HIORDIS. Ay once, and only once; it was that night when Gunnar sat
with me in my bower; he crushed me in his arms till his byrnie burst,
and then, then----!

  DAGNY (exclaiming). What! Sigurd----!

  HIORDIS. Sigurd? What of Sigurd? I spoke of Gunnar--that night when
he bore me away----

  DAGNY (collecting herself). Yes, yes, I remember--I know well----

  HIORDIS. That was the only time; never, never again! I deemed I was
bewitched; for that Gunnar could clasp a woman---- (Stops and looks
at DAGNY.) What ails thee? Methinks thou turnest pale and red!

  DARNY. Nay, nay!

  HIORDIS (without noticing her). The merry viking-raid should have
been _my_ lot; it had been better for me, and--mayhap for all of us.
That were life, full and rich life! Dost thou not wonder, Dagny, to
find me here alive? Art not afraid to be alone with me in the hall?
Deem'st thou not that I must have died in all these years, and that
it is my ghost that stands at thy side?

  DAGNY (painfully affected). Come--let us go--to the others.

  HIORDIS (seizing her by the arm). No, stay! Seems it not strange
to thee, Dagny, that any woman can yet live after five such nights?

  DAGNY. Five nights?

  HIORDIS. Here in the north each night is a whole winter long.
(Quickly and with an altered expression.) Yet the place is fair
enough, doubt it not! Thou shalt see sights here such as thou hast
not seen in the halls of the English king. We shall be together as
sisters whilst thou bidest with me; we shall go down to the sea when
the storm begins once more; thou shalt see the billows rushing upon
the land like wild, white-maned horses--and then the whales far out
in the offing! They dash one against another like steel-clad knights!
Ha, what joy to be a witching-wife and ride on the whale's back--to
speed before the skiff, and wake the storm, and lure men to the deeps
with lovely songs of sorcery!

  DAGNY. Fie, Hiordis, how canst thou talk so!

  HIORDIS. Canst thou sing sorceries, Dagny?

  DAGNY (with horror). I!

  HIORDIS. I trow thou canst; how else didst thou lure Sigurd to thee?

  DAGNY. Thou speakest shameful things; let me go!

  HIORDIS (holding her back). Because I jest! Nay, hear me to the
end! Think, Dagny, what it is to sit by the window in the eventide
and hear the kelpie[1] wailing in the boat-house; to sit waiting and
listening for the dead men's ride to Valhal; for their way lies past
us here in the north. They are the brave men that fell in fight, the
strong women that did not drag out their lives tamely, like thee and
me; they sweep through the storm-night on their black horses, with
jangling bells! (Embraces DAGNY, and presses her wildly in her arms.)
Ha, Dagny! think of riding the last ride on so rare a steed!

    [1] "Draugen," a vague and horrible sea-monster.

  DAGNY (struggling to escape). Hiordis, Hiordis! Let me go! I will
not hear thee!

  HIORDIS (laughing). Weak art thou of heart, and easily affrighted.

    (GUNNAR enters from the back, with SIGURD and THOROLF.)

  GUNNAR. Now, truly, are all things to my very mind! I have found
thee again, Sigurd, my brave brother, as kind and true as of old. I
have Ornulf's son under my roof, and the old man himself follows
speedily after; is it not so?

  THOROLF. So he promised.

  GUNNAR. Then all I lack is that Egil should be here.

  THOROLF. 'Tis plain thou lovest the boy, thou namest him so oft.

  GUNNAR. Truly I love him; he is my only child; and he is like to
grow up fair and kindly.

  HIORDIS. But no warrior.

  GUNNAR. Nay--that thou must not say.

  SIGURD. I marvel thou didst send him from thee----

  GUNNAR. Would that I had not! (Half aside.) But thou knowest, Sigurd,
he who loves overmuch, takes not always the manliest part. (Aloud.) I
had few men in my house, and none could be sure of his life when it was
known that Ornulf lay in the cove with a ship of war.

  HIORDIS. One thing I know that ought first to be made safe, life
afterwards.

  THOROLF. And that is----?

  HIORDIS. Honour and fame among men.

  GUNNAR. Hiordis!

  SIGURD. It shall not be said of Gunnar that he has risked his honour
by doing this.

  GUNNAR (sternly). None shall make strife between me and Ornulf's
kinsfolk!

  HIORDIS (smiling). Hm; tell me, Sigurd--can thy ship sail with
any wind?

  SIGURD. Ay, when it is cunningly steered.

  HIORDIS. Good! I too will steer my ship cunningly, and make my way
whither I will.

    (Retires towards the back.)

  DAGNY (whispers, uneasily). Sigurd, let us hence--this very night!

  SIGURD. It is too late now; it was thou that----

  DAGNY. Then I held Hiordis dear; but now----; I have heard her
speak words I shudder to think of.

    (SIGURD'S men, with other guests, men and women, house-carls and
      handmaidens, enter from the back.)

  GUNNAR (after a short pause for the exchange of greetings and so
forth). Now to the board! My chief guest, Ornulf of the Fiords, comes
later; so Thorolf promises.

  HIORDIS (to the house-folk). Pass ale and mead around, that hearts
may wax merry and tongues may be loosened.

    (GUNNAR leads SIGURD to the high-seat on the right. DAGNY seats
      herself on SIGURD'S right, HIORDIS opposite him at the other
      side of the same table. THOROLF is in like manner ushered to
      a place at the other table, and thus sits opposite GUNNAR, who
      occupies the greater high-seat. The others take their seats
      further back.)

  HIORDIS (after a pause in which they drink with each other and
converse quietly across the tables). It seldom chances that so many
brave men are seated together, as I see to-night in our hall. It
were fitting, then, that we should essay the old pastime: Let each
man name his chief exploit, that all may judge which is the mightiest.

  GUNNAR. That is an ill custom at a drinking-feast; it will oft
breed strife.

  HIORDIS. Little did I deem that Gunnar was afraid.

  SIGURD. That no one deems; but it were long ere we came to an end,
were we all to tell of our exploits, so many as we be. Do thou rather
tell us, Gunnar, of thy journey to Biarmeland; 'tis no small exploit
to fare so far to the north, and gladly would we hear of it.

  HIORDIS. The journey to Biarmeland is chapman's work, and little
worth to be named among warriors. Nay, do thou begin, Sigurd, if
thou would'st not have me deem that thou shrinkest from hearing my
husband's praise! Say on; name that one of thy deeds which thou
dost prize the highest.

  SIGURD. Well, since thou will have it so, so must it be. Let it
be told, then, that I lay a-viking among the Orkneys; there came
foemen against us, but we swept them from their ships, and I fought
alone against eight men.

  HIORDIS. Good was that deed; but wast thou fully armed?

  SIGURD. Fully armed, with axe, spear, and sword.

  HIORDIS. Still the deed was good. Now must thou, my husband, name
that which thou deemest the greatest among thy exploits.

  GUNNAR (unwillingly). I slew two berserkers who had seized a
merchant-ship; and thereupon I sent the captive chapmen home, giving
them there ship freely, without ransom. The King of England deemed
well of that deed; he said that I had done hounourably, and gave me
thanks and good gifts.

  HIORDIS. Nay truly, Gunnar, a better deed than that couldst thou
name.

  GUNNAR (vehemently). I will boast of no other deed! Since last I
fared from Iceland I have lived at peace and traded in merchandise.
No more word on this matter!

  HIORDIS. If thou thyself wilt hide thy renown, thy wife shall speak.

  GUNNAR. Peace, Hiordis--I command thee!

  HIORDIS. Sigurd fought with eight men, being fully armed; Gunnar
came to my bower in the black night, slew the bear that had twenty
men's strength, and yet had but a short sword in his hand.

  GUNNAR (violently agitated). Woman, not a word more!

  DAGNY (softly). Sigurd, wilt thou bear----?

  SIGURD (likewise). Be still!

  HIORDIS (to the company). And now, ye brave men--which is the
mightier, Sigurd or Gunnar?

  GUNNAR. Silence!

  HIORDIS (loudly). Speak out; I have the right to crave your judgement.

  AN OLD MAN (among the guests). If the truth be told, then is
Gunnar's deed greater than all other deeds of men; Gunnar is the
mightiest warrior, and Sigurd is second to him.

  GUNNAR (with a glance across the table). Ah, Sigurd, Sigurd, didst
thou but know----!

  DAGNY (softly). This is too much--even for a friend!

  SIGURD. Peace, wife! (Aloud, to the others.) Ay truly, Gunnar is
the most honourable of all men; so would I esteem him to my dying
day, even had he never done that deed; for that I hold more lightly
than ye.

  HIORDIS. There speaks thy envy, Sigurd Viking!

  SIGURD (smiling). Mightily art thou mistaken. (Kindly, to GUNNAR,
drinking to him across the table.) Hail, noble Gunnar; our friendship
shall stand fast, whosoever may seek to break it.

  HIORDIS. No one, that I wot of, has such a thought.

  SIGURD. Say not that; I could almost find it in me to think that
thou hadst bidden us hither to stir up strife.

  HIORDIS. That is like thee, Sigurd; now art thou wroth that thou
may'st not be held the mightiest man at the feast-board.

  SIGURD. I have ever esteemed Gunnar more highly than myself.

  HIORDIS. Well, well--second to Gunnar is still a good place, and----
(with a side-glance at THOROLF) had Ornulf been here, he could have
had the third seat.

  THOROLF. Then would Jokul, thy father, find a low place indeed; for
he fell before Ornulf.

    (The following dispute is carried on, by both parties, with rising
      and yet repressed irritation.)

  HIORDIS. That shalt thou never say! Ornulf is a skald, and men
whisper that he has praised himself for greater deeds than he has
done.

  THOROLF. Then woe to him who whispers so loudly that it comes to
my ear!

  HIORDIS (with a smile of provocation). Wouldst thou avenge it?

  THOROLF. Ay, so that my vengeance should be told of far and wide.

  HIORDIS. Then here I pledge a cup to this, that thou may'st first
have a beard on thy chin.

  THOROLF. Even a beardless lad is too good to wrangle with women.

  HIORDIS. But too weak to fight with men; therefore thy father let
thee lie by the hearth at home in Iceland, whilst thy brothers went
a-viking.

  THOROLF. It had been well had he kept as good an eye on thee; for
then hadst thou not left Iceland a dishonoured woman.

  GUNNAR AND SIGURD. Thorolf!

  DAGNY (simultaneously). Brother!

  HIORDIS (softly, and quivering with rage). Ha! wait--wait!

  THOROLF (gives GUNNAR his hand). Be not wroth, Gunnar; evil words
came to my tongue; but thy wife egged me!

  DAGNY (softly and imploringly). Foster-sister, by any love thou
hast ever borne me, stir not up strife!

  HIORDIS (laughing). Jests must pass at the feast-board if the
merriment is to thrive.

  GUNNAR (who has been talking softly to THOROLF). Thou art a brave
lad! (Hands him a sword which hangs beside the high-seat.) Here,
Thorolf, here is a good gift for thee. Wield it well, and let us
be friends.

  HIORDIS. Beware how thou givest away thy weapons, Gunnar; for men
may say thou dost part with things thou canst not use!

  THOROLF (who has meanwhile examined the sword). Thanks for the gift,
Gunnar; it shall never be drawn in an unworthy cause.

  HIORDIS. If thou wilt keep that promise, then do thou never lend
the sword to thy brothers.

  GUNNAR. Hiordis!

  HIORDIS (continuing). Neither let it hang on thy father's wall; for
there it would hang with base men's weapons.

  THOROLF. True enough, Hiordis--for there thy father's axe and shield
have hung this many a year.

  HIORDIS (mastering herself). That Ornulf slew my father,--that deed
is ever on thy tongue; but if report speak true, it was scarce so
honourable a deed as thou deemest.

  THOROLF. Of what report dost thou speak?

  HIORDIS. I dare not name it, for it would make thee wroth.

  THOROLF. Then hold thy peace--I ask no better.

    (Turns from her.)

  HIORDIS. Nay, why should I not tell it? Is it true, Thorolf, that
for three nights thy father sat in woman's weed, doing sorceries with
the witch of Smalserhorn, ere he dared face Jokul in fight.

    (All rise; violent excitement among the guests.)

  GUNNAR, SIGURD, AND DAGNY. Hiordis!

  THOROLF (bitterly exasperated). So base a lie has no man spoken of
Ornulf of the Fiords! Thou thyself hast made it, for no one less
venomous than thou could dream of such a thing. The blackest crime
a man can do hast thou laid at my father's door. (Throwing the sword
away.) There, Gunnar, take thy gift again; I can take nought from the
house wherein my father is reviled.

  GUNNAR. Thorolf, hear me----!

  THOROLF. Let me go! But beware both thou and Hiordis; for my father
has now in his power one whom ye hold dearest of all!

  HIORDIS (starting). Thy father has----!

  GUNNAR (with a cry). What sayst thou!

  SIGURD (vehemently). Where is Ornulf?

  THOROLF (with mocking laughter). Gone southward--with my brothers.

  GUNNAR. Southward!

  HIORDIS (shrieking). Gunnar! Ornulf has slain Egil, our son.

  GUNNAR. Slain!--Egil slain! Then woe to Ornulf and all his race!
Thorolf, speak out;--is this true?

  SIGURD. Gunnar, Gunnar--hear me!

  GUNNAR. Speak out, if thou care for thy life!

  THOROLF. Thou canst not fright me! Wait till my father comes;
he shall plant a mark of shame over against Gunnar's house! And
meanwhile, Hiordis, do thou cheer thee with these words I heard
to-day: "Ere eventide shall Gunnar and his wife be childless."

    (Goes out by the back.)

  GUNNAR (in the deepest pain). Slain--slain! My little Egil slain!

  HIORDIS (wildly). And thou--dost thou let him go? Let Egil, thy
child, lie unavenged! Then wert thou the dastard of dastards----!

  GUNNAR (as if beside himself). A sword--an axe! It is the last
message he shall bring!

    (Seizes an axe from the bystanders and rushes out.)

  SIGURD (about to follow). Gunnar, hold thy hand!

  HIORDIS (holding him back). Stay, stay! The men will part them;
I know Gunnar!

    (A cry from the crowd, which has flocked together at the main door.)

  SIGURD AND DAGNY. What is it?

  A VOICE AMONG THE CROWD. Thorolf has fallen.

  SIGURD. Thorolf! Ha, let me go!

  DAGNY. My brother! Oh, my brother!

    (SIGURD is on the point of rushing out. At the same moment, the
      crowd parts, GUNNAR enters, and throws down the axe at the door.)

  GUNNAR. Now it is done. Egil is avenged!

  SIGURD. Well for thee if thy hand has not been too hasty.

  GUNNAR. Mayhap, mayhap; but Egil, Egil, my sweet boy!

  HIORDIS. Now must we arm us, and seek help among our friends; for
Thorolf has many avengers.

  GUNNAR (gloomily). He will be his own worst avenger; he will haunt
me night and day.

  HIORDIS. Thorolf got his reward. Kinsmen must suffer for kinsmen's
deeds.

  GUNNAR. True, true; but this I know, my mind was lighter ere this
befell.

  HIORDIS. This first night[1] is ever the worst;--Ornulf has sought
his revenge by shameful wiles; he would not come against us in open
strife; he feigned to be peacefully-minded; and then he falls upon
our defenceless child! Ha, I saw more clearly than ye; well I deemed
that Ornulf was evil-minded and false; I had good cause to egg thee
on against him and all his faithless tribe!

    [1] Literally the "blood-night."

  GUNNAR (fiercely). That hadst thou! My vengeance is poor beside
Ornulf's crime. He has lost Thorolf, but he has six sons left--
and I have none--none!

  A HOUSE-CARL (enters hastily from the back). Ornulf of the Fiords
is at hand!

  GUNNAR. Ornulf!

  HIORDIS AND SEVERAL MEN. To arms! to arms!

  DAGNY (simultaneously). My father!

  SIGURD (as if seized by a foreboding). Ornulf----! Ah, Gunnar, Gunnar!

  GUNNAR (draws his sword). Up all my men! Vengeance for Egil's death!

    (ORNULF enters, with EGIL in his arms.)

  GUNNAR (with a shriek). Egil!

  ORNULF. Here I bring thee little Egil.

  ALL (one to another). Egil! Egil alive!

  GUNNAR (letting his sword fall). Woe is me! what have I done?

  DAGNY. Oh, Thorolf, my brother!

  SIGURD. I knew it! I knew it!

  ORNULF (setting EGIL down). There, Gunnar, hast thou thy pretty
boy again.

  EGIL. Father! Old Ornulf would not do me ill, as thou saidst when
I went away.

  ORNULF (to HIORDIS). Now have I atoned for thy father; now surely
there may be peace between us.

  HIORDIS (with repressed emotion). Mayhap!

  GUNNAR (as if waking up). Is it a ghastly dream that maddens me!
Thou--thou bringest Egil home!

  ORNULF. As thou seest; but in truth he has been near his death.

  GUNNAR. That I know.

  ORNULF. And hast no more joy in his return?

  GUNNAR. Had he come sooner, I had been glad indeed. But tell me
all that has befallen!

  ORNULF. That is soon done. Kare the Peasant was plotting evil
against you; with other caitiffs he fared southward after Egil.

  GUNNAR. Kare! (To himself.) Ha, now I understand Thorolf's words!

  ORNULF. His purpose came to my ears; I needs must thwart so black
a deed. I would not give atonement for Jokul, and, had things so
befallen, I had willingly slain thee, Gunnar, in single combat--yet
I could not but protect thy child. With my sons, I hasted after Kare.

  SIGURD (softly). An accursed deed has here been done.

  ORNULF. When I came up with him, Egil's guards lay bound; thy son
was already in thy foemen's hand, and they would not long have spared
him. Hot was the fight! Seldom have I given and taken keener strokes;
Kare and two men fled inland; the rest sleep safely, and will be hard
to waken.

  GUNNAR (in eager suspense). But thou--thou, Ornulf----?

  ORNULF (gloomily). Six sons followed me into the fight.

  GUNNAR (breathlessly). But homewards----?

  ORNULF. None.

  GUNNAR (appalled). None! (Softly.) And Thorolf, Thorolf!

    (Deep emotion among the bystanders. HIORDIS shows signs of a
      violent mental struggle; DAGNY weeps silently by the high-seat
      on the right. SIGURD stands beside her, painfully agitated.)

  ORNULF (after a short pause). It is hard for a many-branching pine
to be stripped in a single storm. But men die and men live;--I will
drink to my sons' memory. (One of SIGURD'S men hands him a horn.)
Hail to you where now ye ride, my bold sons! Close upon your heels
shall the copper-gates not clang, for ye come to the hall with a
great following. (Drinks, and hands back the horn.) And now home
to Iceland! Ornulf has fought his last fight; the old tree has but
one green branch left, and it must be shielded warily. Where is
Thorolf?

  EGIL (to his father). Ay, show me Thorolf! Ornulf told me he would
carve me a ship with many, many warriors on board.

  ORNULF. I praise all good wights that Thorolf came not with us; for
if he too--nay, strong though I be, that had been too heavy for me to
bear. But why comes he not? He was ever the first to meet his father;
for both of us it seemed we could not live without each other a single
day.

  GUNNAR. Ornulf, Ornulf!

  ORNULF (with growing uneasiness). Ye stand all silent, I mark it
now. What ails you? Where is Thorolf?

  DAGNY. Sigurd, Sigurd--this will be the direst blow to him!

  GUNNAR (struggling with himself). Old man!--No---- ---- and yet, it
cannot be hid----

  ORNULF (vehemently). My son! Where is he!

  GUNNAR. Thorolf is slain!

  ORNULF. Slain! Thorolf? Thorolf? Ha, thou liest!

  GUNNAR. I would give my warmest heart-blood to know him alive!

  HIORDIS (to ORNULF). Thorolf was himself to blame for what befell;
with dark sayings he gave us to wit that thou hadst fallen upon Egil
and slain him;--we had parted half in wrath, and thou hast ere now
brought death among my kindred. And moreover--Thorolf bore himself
at the feast like a wanton boy; he brooked not our jesting, and spoke
many evil things. Not till then did Gunnar wax wroth; not till then
did he raise his hand upon thy son; and well I wot that he had good
and lawful ground for that deed.

  ORNULF (calmly). Well may we see that thou art a woman, for thou
usest many words. To what end? If Thorolf is slain, then is his
saga over.

  EGIL. If Thorolf is slain, I shall have no warriors.

  ORNULF. Nay, Egil--we have lost our warriors, but thou and I. (To
HIORDIS.) Thy father sang:

        Jokul's kin for Jokul's slayer
        many a woe shall still be weaving.

Well has thou wrought that his words should come true. (Pauses a
moment, then turns to one of the men.) Where got he his death-wound?

  THE MAN. Right across his brow.

  ORNULF (pleased). Hm; that is an honourable spot; he did not turn
his back. But fell he sideways, or in towards Gunnar's feet?

  THE MAN. Half sideways and half towards Gunnar.

  ORNULF. That bodes but half vengeance; well well,--we shall see!

  GUNNAR (approaching). Ornulf, I know well that all my goods were
naught against thy loss; but crave of me what thou wilt----

  ORNULF (sternly interrupting him). Give me Thorolf's body, and let
me go! Where lies he?

    (GUNNAR points silently to the back.)

  ORNULF (takes a step or two, but turns and says in a voice of
thunder to SIGURD, DAGNY, and others who are preparing to follow
him, sorrowing). Stay! Think ye Ornulf will be followed by a train
of mourners, like a whimpering woman? Stay, I say!--I can bear my
Thorolf alone. (With calm strength.) Sonless I go; but none shall
say that he saw me bowed. (He goes slowly out.)

  HIORDIS (with forced laughter). Ay, let him go as he will; we
shall scarce need many men to face him should he come with strife
again! Now, Dagny--I wot it is the last time thy father shall sail
from Iceland on such a quest!

  SIGURD (indignant). Oh, shame!

  DAGNY (likewise). And thou canst scoff at him--scoff at him, after
all that has befallen?

  HIORDIS. A deed once done, 'tis wise to praise it. This morning
I swore hate and vengeance against Ornulf;--the slaying of Jokul I
might have forgotten--all, save that he cast shame upon my lot. He
called me a leman; if it _be_ so, it shames me not; for Gunnar is
mightier now than thy father; he is greater and more famous than
Sigurd, thine own husband!

  DAGNY (in wild indignation). There thou errest, Hiordis--and even
now shall all men know that thou dwellest under a weakling's roof!

  SIGURD (vehemently). Dagny, beware!

  GUNNAR. A weakling!

  DAGNY. It shall no longer be hidden; I held my peace till thou
didst scoff at my father and my dead brothers; I held my peace while
Ornulf was here, lest he should learn that Thorolf fell by a dastard's
hand. But now--praise Gunnar nevermore for that deed in Iceland; for
Gunnar is a weakling! The sword that lay drawn between thee and the
bear-slayer hangs at my husband's side--and the ring thou didst take
from thy arm thou gavest to Sigurd. (Takes it off and holds if aloft.)
Behold it!

  HIORDIS (wildly). Sigurd!

  THE CROWD. Sigurd! Sigurd did the deed!

  HIORDIS (quivering with agitation). He! he!--Gunnar, is this true?

  GUNNAR (with lofty calm). It is all true save only that I am a
weakling; I am neither a weakling nor a coward.

  SIGURD (moved). That art thou not, Gunnar! That hast thou never
been! (To the rest.) Away, my men! Away from here!

  DAGNY (at the door, to HIORDIS). Who is now the mightiest man at
the board--my husband or thine?

  HIORDIS (to herself). Now have I but one thing left to do--but one
deed to brood upon: Sigurd or I must die!



ACT THIRD.


(The hall in GUNNAR'S house. It is day.)
(HIORDIS sits on the bench in front of the smaller high-seat busy
  weaving a bow-string; on the table lie a bow and some arrows.)


  HIORDIS (pulling at the bow-string). It is tough and strong; (with
a glance at the arrows) the shaft is both keen and well-weighted--
(lets her hands fall in her lap) but where is the hand that----!
(Vehemently.) Befooled, befooled by him--by Sigurd! I must hate him
more than others, that can I well mark; but ere many days have passed
I will---- (Meditating.) Ay, but the arm, the arm that shall do the
deed----?

    (GUNNAR enters, silent and thoughtful, from the back.)

  HIORDIS (after a short pause). How goes it with thee, my husband?

  GUNNAR. Ill, Hiordis; I cannot away with that deed of yesterday; it
lies heavy on my heart.

  HIORDIS. Do as I do; get thee some work to busy thee.

  GUNNAR. Doubtless I must.

    (A pause; GUNNAR paces up and down the hall, notices what HIORDIS
      is doing, and approaches her.)

  GUNNAR. What dost thou there?

  HIORDIS (without looking up). I am weaving a bow-string; canst
thou not see?

  GUNNAR. A bow-string--of thine own hair?

  HIORDIS (smiling). Great deeds are born with every hour in these
times; yesterday thou didst slay my foster-brother, and I have woven
this since day-break.

  GUNNAR. Hiordis, Hiordis!

  HIORDIS (looking up). What is amiss?

  GUNNAR. Where wast thou last night?

  HIORDIS. Last night?

  GUNNAR. Thou wast not in the sleeping-room.

  HIORDIS. Know'st thou that?

  GUNNAR. I could not sleep; I tossed in restless dreams of that--
that which befell Thorolf. I dreamt that he came---- No matter; I
awakened. Then meseemed I heard a strange, fair song through all the
house; I arose; I stole hither to the door; here I saw thee sitting
by the log-fire--it burned blue and red--fixing arrow-heads, and
singing sorceries over them.

  HIORDIS. The work was not wasted; for strong is the breast that
must be pierced this day.

  GUNNAR. I understand thee well; thou wouldst have Sigurd slain.

  HIORDIS. Hm, mayhap.

  GUNNAR. Thou shalt never have thy will. I shall keep peace with
Sigurd, howe'er thou goad me.

  HIORDIS (smiling). Dost think so?

  SIGURD. I know it!

  HIORDIS (hands him the bow-string). Tell me, Gunnar--canst loose
this knot?

  GUNNAR (tries it). Nay it is too cunningly and firmly woven.

  HIORDIS (rising). The Norns[1] weave yet more cunningly; their web
is still harder to unravel.

    [1] The "Nornir" were the Fates of northern mythology.

  GUNNAR. Dark are the ways of the Mighty Ones;--neither thou nor I
know aught of them.

  HIORDIS. Yet one thing I know surely: that to both of us must
Sigurd's life be baleful.

    (A pause; GUNNAR stands lost in thought.)

  HIORDIS (who has been silently watching him). Of what thinkest thou?

  GUNNAR. Of a dream I had of late. Methought I had done the deed
thou cravest; Sigurd lay slain on the earth; thou didst stand beside
him, and thy face was wondrous pale. Then said I: "Art thou glad,
now that I have done thy will?" But thou didst laugh and answer:
"Blither were I didst thou, Gunnar, lie there in Sigurd's stead."

  HIORDIS (with forced laughter). Ill must thou know me if such a
senseless dream can make thee hold thy hand.

  GUNNAR. Hm!--Tell me, Hiordis, what thinkest thou of this hall?

  HIORDIS. To speak truly, Gunnar,--it sometimes seems to me to be
straitened.

  GUNNAR. Ay, ay, so I have thought; we are one too many.

  HIORDIS. Two, mayhap.

  GUNNAR (who has not heard her last words). But that shall be
remedied.

  HIORDIS (looks at him interrogatively). Remedied? Then thou art
minded to----?

  GUNNAR. To fit out my warships and put to sea; I will win back the
honour I have lost because thou wast dearer to me than all beside.

  HIORDIS (thoughtfully). Thou wilt put to sea? Ay, so it may be
best for us both.

  GUNNAR. Even from the day we sailed from Iceland, I saw that it
would go ill with us. Thy soul is strong and proud; there are times
when I well nigh fear thee; yet, it is strange--chiefly for that do
I hold thee so dear. Dread enwraps thee like a spell; methinks thou
could'st lure me to the blackest deeds, and all would seem good to
me that thou didst crave. (Shaking his head reflectively.)
Unfathomable is the Norn's rede; Sigurd should have been thy husband.

  HIORDIS (vehemently). Sigurd!

  GUNNAR. Yes, Sigurd. Vengefulness and hatred blind thee, else
would'st thou prize him better. Had I been like Sigurd, I could
have made life bright for thee.

  HIORDIS (with strong but suppressed emotion). That--that deemest
thou Sigurd could have done?

  GUNNAR. He is strong of soul, and proud as thou to boot.

  HIORDIS (violently). If that be so--(Collecting herself.) No
matter, no matter! (With a wild outburst.) Gunnar, take Sigurd's
life!

  GUNNAR. Never!

  HIORDIS. By fraud and falsehood thou mad'st me thy wife--that
shall be forgotten! Five joyless years have I spent in this house--
all shall be forgotten from the day when Sigurd lives no more!

  GUNNAR. From my hand he need fear no harm. (Shrinks back
involuntarily.) Hiordis, Hiordis, tempt me not!

  HIORDIS. Then must I find another avenger; Sigurd shall not live
long to flout at me and thee! (Clenching her hands in convulsive
rage.) With her--that simpleton--with her mayhap he is even now
sitting alone, dallying, and laughing at us; speaking of the bitter
wrong that was done me when in thy stead he bore me away; telling
how he laughed over his guile as he stood in my dark bower, and I
knew him not!

  GUNNAR. Nay, nay, he does not so!

  HIORDIS (firmly). Sigurd and Dagny must die! I cannot breathe
till they are gone! (Comes close up to him, with sparkling eyes,
and speaks passionately, but in a whisper.) Would'st thou help
me with _that_, Gunnar, then should I live in love with thee; then
should I clasp thee in such warm and wild embraces as thou hast
never dreamt of!

  GUNNAR (wavering). Hiordis! Would'st thou----

  HIORDIS. Do the deed, Gunnar--and the heavy days shall be past. I
will no longer quit the hall when thou comest, no longer speak harsh
things and quench thy smile when thou art glad. I will clothe me in
furs and costly silken robes. When thou goest to war, I will ride
by thy side. At the feast I will sit by thee and fill thy horn, and
drink to thee and sing fair songs to make glad thy heart!

  GUNNAR (almost overcome). Is it true? Thou wouldst----!

  HIORDIS. More than that, trust me, ten times more! Give me revenge!
Revenge on Sigurd and Dagny, and I will---- (Stops as she sees the
door open.) Dagny--comest thou here!

  DAGNY (from the back). Haste thee, Gunnar! Call thy men to arms!

  GUNNAR. To arms! Against whom?

  DAGNY. Kare the Peasant is coming, and many outlaws with him; he
means thee no good; Sigurd has barred his way for the time; but who
can tell----

  GUNNAR (moved). Sigurd has done this for me!

  DAGNY. Sigurd is ever thy faithful friend.

  GUNNAR. And we, Hiordis--we, who thought to----! It is as I say--
there is a spell in all thy speech; no deed but seemeth fair to me,
when thou dost name it.

  DAGNY (astonished). What meanest thou?

  GUNNAR. Nothing, nothing! Thanks for thy tidings, Dagny; I go to
gather my men together. (Turns towards the door, but stops and comes
forward again.) Tell me--how goes it with Ornulf?

  DAGNY (bowing her head). Ask me not. Yesterday he bore Thorolf's
body to the ships; now he is raising a grave-mound on the shore;--
there shall his son be laid.

    (GUNNAR says nothing and goes out by the back.)

  DAGNY. Until evening there is no danger. (Coming nearer.) Hiordis,
I have another errand in thy house; it is to thee I come.

  HIORDIS. To me? After all that befell yesterday?

  DAGNY. Just because of that. Hiordis, foster-sister, do not hate
me; forget the words that sorrow and evil spirits placed in my mouth;
forgive me all the wrong I have done thee; for, trust me, I am tenfold
more hapless than thou!

  HIORDIS. Hapless--thou! Sigurd's wife!

  DAGNY. It was _my_ doing, all that befell--the stirring up of
strife, and Thorolf's death, and all the scorn that fell upon Gunnar
and thee. Mine is all the guilt! Woe upon me!--I have lived so
happily; but after this day I shall never know joy again.

  HIORDIS (as if seized by a sudden thought). But before--in these
five long years--all that time hast thou been happy?

  DAGNY. Canst thou doubt it?

  HIORDIS. Hm; yesterday I doubted it not; but----

  DAGNY. What meanest thou?

  HIORDIS. Nay, 'tis nought; let us speak of other matters.

  DAGNY. No truly. Hiordis, tell me----!

  HIORDIS. It will profit thee little; but since thou wilt have it
so---- (With a malignant expression.) Canst thou remember once, over
in Iceland--we had followed with Ornulf thy father to the Council,
and we sat with our playmates in the Council Hall, as is the manner
of women. Then came two strangers into the hall.

  DAGNY. Sigurd and Gunnar.

  HIORDIS. They greeted us in courteous fashion, and sat on the
bench beside us; and there passed between us much merry talk. There
were some who must needs know why these two vikings came thither, and
if they were not minded to take them wives there in the island. Then
said Sigurd: "It will be hard for me to find the woman that shall be
to my mind." Ornulf laughed, and said there was no lack of high-born
and well-dowered women in Iceland; but Sigurd answered: "The warrior
needs a high-souled wife. She whom I choose must not rest content
with a humble lot; no honour must seem to high for her to strive for;
she must go with me gladly a-viking; war-weed must she wear; she must
egg me on to strife, and never wink her eyes where sword-blades
lighten; for if she be faint-hearted, scant honour will befall me."
Is it not true, so Sigurd spake?

  DAGNY (hesitatingly). True, he did--but----

  HIORDIS. _Such_ was she to be, the woman who could make life fair
to him; and then--(with a scornful smile) then he chose thee!

  DAGNY (starting, as in pain). Ha, thou wouldst say that----?

  HIORDIS. Doubtless thou has proved thyself proud and high-souled;
hast claimed honour of all, that Sigurd might be honoured in thee--
is it not so?

  DAGNY. Nay, Hiordis, but----

  HIORDIS. Thou hast egged him on to great deeds, followed him in war-
weed, and joyed to be where the strife raged hottest--hast thou not?

  DAGNY (deeply moved). No, no!

  HIORDIS. Hast thou, then, been faint of heart, so that Sigurd has
been put to shame?

  DAGNY (overpowered). Hiordis, Hiordis!

  HIORDIS (smiling scornfully). Yet thy lot has been a happy one all
these years;--think'st thou that Sigurd can say the same?

  DAGNY. Torture me not. Woe is me! thou hast made me see myself
too clearly.

  HIORDIS. A jesting word, and at once thou art in tears! Think no
more of it. Look what I have done to-day. (Takes some arrows from
the table.) Are they not keen and biting--feel! I know well how to
sharpen arrows, do I not?

  DAGNY. And to use them too; thou strikest surely, Hiordis! All
that thou hast said to me--I have never thought of before. (More
vehemently.) But that Sigurd----! That for all these years I should
have made his life heavy and unhonoured;--no, no, it cannot be true!

  HIORDIS. Nay now, comfort thee, Dagny; indeed it is not true. Were
Sigurd of the same mind as in former days, it might be true enough;
for then was his whole soul bent on being the foremost man in the
land;--now he is content with a lowlier lot.

  DAGNY. No, Hiordis; Sigurd is high-minded now as ever; I see it
well, I am not the right mate for him. He has hidden it from me;
but it shall be so no longer.

  HIORDIS. What wilt thou do?

  DAGNY. I will no longer hang like a clog upon his feet; I will be
a hindrance to him no longer.

  HIORDIS. Then thou wilt----?

  DAGNY. Peace; some one comes!

    (A House-carl enters from the back.)

  THE CARL. Sigurd Viking is coming to the hall.

  HIORDIS. Sigurd! Then call Gunnar hither.

  THE CARL. Gunnar has ridden forth to gather his neighbours
together; for Kare the Peasant would----

  HIORDIS. Good, good, I know it; go! (The Carl goes. To DAGNY, who
is also going.) Whither wilt thou?

  DAGNY. I will not meet Sigurd. Too well I feel that we must part;
but to meet him now--no, no, I cannot!

    (Goes out to the left.)

  HIORDIS (looks after her in silence for a moment). And it was she
I would have---- (completes her thought by a glance at the bow-string).
That would have been a poor revenge;--nay, I have cut deeper now! Hm;
it is hard to die, but sometimes it is harder still to live!

    (SIGURD enters from the back.)

  HIORDIS. Doubtless thou seekest Gunnar; be seated, he will be here
even now.

    (Is going.)

  SIGURD. Nay, stay; it is thee I seek, rather than him.

  HIORDIS. Me?

  SIGURD. And 'tis well I find thee alone.

  HIORDIS. If thou comest to mock me, it would sure be no hindrance
to thee though the hall were full of men and women.

  SIGURD. Ay, ay, well I know what thoughts thou hast of me.

  HIORDIS (bitterly). I do thee wrong mayhap! Nay, nay, Sigurd, thou
hast been as a poison to all my days. Bethink thee who it was that
wrought that shameful guile; who it was that lay by my side in the
bower, feigning love with the laugh of cunning in his heart; who it
was that flung me forth to Gunnar, since for him I was good enough,
forsooth--and then sailed away with the woman he held dear!

  SIGURD. Man's will can do this and that; but fate rules in the deeds
that shape our lives--so has it gone with us twain.

  HIORDIS. True enough; evil Norns hold sway over the world; but their
might is little if they find not helpers in our own heart. Happy is
he who has strength to battle with the Norn--and it is that I have
now in hand.

  SIGURD. What mean'st thou?

  HIORDIS. I will essay a trial of strength against those--those who
are over me. But let us not talk more of this; I have much to do to-
day. (She seats herself at the table.)

  SIGURD (after a pause). Thou makest good weapons for Gunnar.

  HIORDIS (with a quiet smile). Not for Gunnar, but against thee.

  SIGURD. Most like it is the same thing.

  HIORDIS. Ay, most like it is; for if I be a match for the Norn,
then sooner or later shalt thou and Gunnar---- (breaks off, leans
backwards against the table, and says with an altered ring in her
voice:) Hm; knowest thou what I sometimes dream? I have often made
it my pastime to limn pleasant pictures in my mind; I sit and close
my eyes and think: Now comes Sigurd the Strong to the isle;--he will
burn us in our house, me and my husband. All Gunnar's men have
fallen; only he and I are left; they set light to the roof from
without:--"A bow-shot," cries Gunnar, "one bow-shot may save us;"--
then the bow-string breaks--"Hiordis, cut a tress of thy hair and
make a bow-string of it,--our life is at stake." But then I laugh--
"Let it burn, let it burn--to me, life is not worth a handful of hair!"

  SIGURD. There is a strange might in all thy speech. (Approaches her.)

  HIORDIS (looks coldly at him). Wouldst sit beside me?

  SIGURD. Thou deemest my heart is bitter towards thee. Hiordis, this
is the last time we shall have speech together; there is something
that gnaws me like a sore sickness, and thus I cannot part from thee;
thou must know me better.

  HIORDIS. What wouldst thou?

  SIGURD. Tell thee a saga.

  HIORDIS. Is it sad?

  SIGURD. Sad, as life itself.

  HIORDIS (bitterly). What knowest thou of the sadness of life?

  SIGURD. Judge when my saga is over.

  HIORDIS. Then tell it me; I shall work the while.

    (He sits on a low stool to her right.)

  SIGURD. Once upon a time there were two young vikings, who set
forth from Norway to win wealth and honour; they had sworn each other
friendship; and held truly together, how far soever thy might fare.

  HIORDIS. And the two young vikings hight Sigurd and Gunnar?

  SIGURD. Ay, we may call them so. At last they came to Iceland; and
there dwelt an old chieftain, who had come forth from Norway in King
Harald's days. He had two fair women in his house; but one, his
foster-daughter, was the noblest, for she was wise and strong of
soul; and the vikings spoke of her between themselves, and never
had they seen a fairer woman, so deemed they both.

  HIORDIS (in suspense). Both? Wilt thou mock me?

  SIGURD. Gunnar thought of her night and day, and that did Sigurd no
less; but both held their peace, and no man could say from her bearing
whether Gunnar found favour in her eyes; but that Sigurd misliked her,
that was easy to discern.

  HIORDIS (breathlessly). Go on, go on----!

  SIGURD. Yet ever the more must Sigurd dream of her; but of that wist
no man. Now it befell one evening that there was a drinking-feast;
and then swore that proud woman that no man should possess her save
he who wrought a mighty deed, which she named. High beat Sigurd's
heart for joy; for he felt within him the strength to do that deed;
but Gunnar took him apart and told him of his love;--Sigurd said
naught of his, but went to the----

  HIORDIS (vehemently). Sigurd, Sigurd! (Controlling herself.) And
this saga--is it true?

  SIGURD. True it is. One of us had to yield; Gunnar was my friend;
I could do aught else. So thou becamest Gunnar's wife, and I wedded
another woman.

  HIORDIS. And came to love her!

  SIGURD. I learned to prize her; but one woman only has Sigurd
loved, and that is she who frowned upon him from the first day they
met. Here ends my saga; and now let us part.--Farewell, Gunnar's
wife; never shall we meet again.

  HIORDIS (springing up). Stay, stay! Woe to us both; Sigurd, what
hast thou done?

  SIGURD (starting). I, done? What ails thee?

  HIORDIS. And all this dost thou tell me now! But no--it cannot
be true!

  SIGURD. These are my last words to thee, and every word is true.
I would not thou shouldst think hardly of me, therefore I needs
must speak.

  HIORDIS (involuntarily clasps her hands together and gazes at him
in voiceless astonishment). Loved--loved me--thou! (Vehemently,
coming close up to him.) I will not believe thee! (Looks hard at
him.) Yes, it is true, and--baleful for us both!

    (Hides her face in her hands, and turns away from him.)

  SIGURD (terror-stricken). Hiordis!

  HIORDIS (softly, struggling with tears and laughter). Nay, heed
me not! This was all I meant, that---- (Lays her hand on his arm.)
Sigurd, thou hast not told thy saga to the end; that proud woman
thou didst tell of--she returned thy love!

  SIGURD (starts backwards). Thou?

  HIORDIS (with composure). Yes, Sigurd, I have loved thee, at last
I understand it. Thou sayest I was ungentle and short of speech
towards thee; what wouldst thou have a woman do? I could not offer
thee my love, for then had I been little worthy of thee. I deemed
thee ever the noblest man of men; and then to know thee another's
husband--'twas that caused me the bitter pain, that myself I could
not understand!

  SIGURD (much moved). A baleful web has the Norn woven around us
twain.

  HIORDIS. The blame is thine own; bravely and firmly it becomes a
man to act. When I set that hard proof for him who should win me,
my thought was of thee;--yet could'st thou----!

  SIGURD. I knew Gunnar's soul-sickness; I alone could heal it;--was
there aught for me to choose? And yet, had I known what I now know, I
scarce dare answer for myself; for great is the might of love.

  HIORDIS (with animation). But now, Sigurd!--A baleful hap has held
us apart all these years; now the knot is loosed; the days to come
shall make good the past to us.

  SIGURD (shaking his head). It cannot be; we must part again.

  HIORDIS. Nay, we must not. I love thee, that may I now say unashamed;
for my love is no mere dalliance, like a weak woman's; were I a man--
by all the Mighty Ones, I could still love thee, even as now I do! Up
then, Sigurd! Happiness is worth a daring deed; we are both free if
we but will it, and then the game is won.

  SIGURD. Free? What meanest thou?

  HIORDIS. What is Dagny to thee? What can she be to thee? No more
than I count Gunnar in my secret heart. What matters it though two
worthless lives be wrecked?

  SIGURD. Hiordis, Hiordis!

  HIORDIS. Let Gunnar stay where he is; let Dagny fare with her father
to Iceland; I will follow thee in harness of steel, withersoever thou
wendest. (SIGURD makes a movement.) Not as thy wife will I follow
thee; for I have belonged to another, and the woman lives that has
lain by thy side. No, Sigurd, not as they wife, but like those mighty
women, like Hilde's sisters,[1] will I follow thee, and fire thee to
strife and to manly deeds, so that thy name shall be heard over every
land. In the sword-game will I stand by thy side; I will fare forth
among thy warriors on the stormy viking-raids; and when the death-
song is sung, it shall tell of Sigurd and Hiordis in one!

    [1] The Valkyries.

  SIGURD. Once was that my fairest dream; now, it is too late. Gunnar
and Dagny stand between us, and that by right. I crushed my love for
Gunnar's sake;--how great soever my suffering, I cannot undo my deed.
And Dagny--full of faith and trust she left her home and kindred;
never must she dream that I longed for Hiordis as often as she took
me to her breast.

  HIORDIS. And for such a cause wilt thou lay a burden on thy life!
To what end hast thou strength and might, and therewith all noble gifts
of the mind? And deemest thou it can now beseem me to dwell beneath
Gunnar's roof? Nay, Sigurd, trust me, there are many tasks awaiting
such a man as thou. Erik is king of Norway--do thou rise against him!
Many goodly warriors will join thee and swear thee fealty; with
unconquerable might will we press onward, and fight and toil unresting
until thou art seated on the throne of Harfager!

  SIGURD. Hiordis, Hiordis, so have I dreamt in my wild youth; let
it be forgotten--tempt me not!

  HIORDIS (impressively). It is the Norn's will that we two shall
hold together; it cannot be altered. Plainly now I see my task in
life: to make thee famous over all the world. Thou hast stood before
me every day, every hour of my life; I sought to tear thee out of
my mind, but I lacked the might; now it is needless, now that I know
thou lovest me.

  SIGURD (with forced coldness). If that be so--then know--I _have_
loved thee; it is past now;--I have forgot those days.

  HIORDIS. Sigurd, in that thou liest! So much at least am I worth,
that if thou hast loved me once, thou canst never forget it.

  SIGURD (vehemently). I must; and now I will.

  HIORDIS. So be it; but thou _canst_ not. Thou wilt seek to hinder
me, but in vain; ere evening falls, Gunnar and Dagny shall know all.

  SIGURD. Ha, that wilt thou never do!

  HIORDIS. That will I do!

  SIGURD. Then must I know thee ill; high-souled have I ever deemed
thee.

  HIORDIS. Evil days breed evil thoughts; too great has been thy
trust in me. I will, I must, go forth by thy side--forth to face
life and strife; Gunnar's roof-tree is too low for me.

  SIGURD (with emphasis). But honour between man and man hast thou
highly prized. There lack not grounds for strife between me and
Gunnar; say, now, that he fell by my hand, wouldst thou still make
all known and follow me?

  HIORDIS (starting). Wherefore askest thou?

  SIGURD. Answer me first: what wouldst thou do, were I to thy husband
his bane.

  HIORDIS (looks hard at him). Then must I keep silence and never rest
until I had seen thee slain.

  SIGURD (with a smile). It is well, Hiordis--I knew it.

  HIORDIS (hastily). But it can never come to pass!

  SIGURD. It must come to pass; thou thyself hast cast the die for
Gunnar's life and mine.

    (GUNNAR, with some House-carls, enters from the back.)

  GUNNAR (gloomily, to HIORDIS). See now; the seed thou hast sown is
shooting bravely!

  SIGURD (approaching). What is amiss with thee?

  GUNNAR. Sigurd, is it thou? What is amiss? Nought but what I might
well have foreseen. As soon as Dagny, thy wife, had brought tidings
of Kare the Peasant, I took horse and rode to my neighbours to crave
help against him.

  HIORDIS (eagerly). Well?

  GUNNAR. I was answered awry where'er I came: my dealings with Kare
had been little to my honour, it was said;--hm, other things were said
to boot, that I will not utter.--I am spurned at by all; I am thought
to have done a dastard deed; men hold it a shame to make common cause
with me.

  SIGURD. It shall not long be held a shame; ere evening comes, thou
shalt have men enough to face Kare.

  GUNNAR. Sigurd!

  HIORDIS (in a low voice, triumphantly). Ha, I knew it well!

  SIGURD (with forced resolution). But then is there an end to the
peace between us; for hearken to my words, Gunnar--thou hast slain
Thorolf, my wife's kinsman, and therefore do I challenge thee to
single combat[1] to-morrow at break of day.

    [1] _Holmgang_--see note, p. 138 [_Holmgang_=duel.]

    (HIORDIS, in violent inward emotion, makes a stride towards SIGURD,
      but collects herself and remains standing motionless during the
      following.)

  GUNNAR (in extreme astonishment). To single combat----! Me!--Thou
art jesting, Sigurd!

  SIGURD. Thou art lawfully challenged to single combat; 'twill be a
game for life or death; one of us must fall!

  GUNNAR (bitterly). Ha, I understand it well. When I came, thou
didst talk with Hiordis alone; she has goaded thee afresh!

  SIGURD. May hap. (Half towards HIORDIS.) A high-souled woman must
ever guard her husband's honour. (To the men in the background.) And
do ye, house-carls, now go to Gunnar's neighbours, and say to them
that to-morrow he is to ply sword-strokes with me; none dare call
that man a dastard who bears arms against Sigurd Viking!

    (The House-carls go out by the back.)

  GUNNAR (goes quickly up to SIGURD and presses his hands, in strong
emotion). Sigurd, my brave brother, now I understand thee! Thou
venturest thy life for my honour, as of old for my happiness!

  SIGURD. Thank thy wife; she has the largest part in what I do. To-
morrow at break of day----

  GUNNAR. I will meet thee. (Tenderly.) Foster-brother, wilt thou
have a good blade of me? It is a gift of price.

  SIGURD. I thank thee; but let it hang.--Who knows if next evening
I may have any use for it.

  GUNNAR (shakes his hand). Farewell, Sigurd!

  SIGURD. Again farewell, and fortune befriend thee this night!

    (They part. GUNNAR goes out to the right. SIGURD casts a glance
      at HIORDIS, and goes out by the back.)

  HIORDIS (after a pause, softly and thoughtfully). To-morrow they
fight! Which will fall? (After a moment's silence, she bursts forth
as if seized by a strong resolution.) Let fall who will--Sigurd and
I shall still be together!



ACT FOURTH.


(By the coast. It is evening; the moon breaks forth now and again,
  from among dark and ragged storm-clouds. At the back, a black
  grave-mound, newly heaped up.)
(ORNULF sits on a stone, in front on the right, his head bare, his
  elbows resting on his knees, and his face buried in his hands. His
  men are digging at the mound; some give light with pine-knot torches.
  After a short pause, SIGURD and DAGNY enter from the boat-house,
  where a wood fire is burning.)


  DAGNY (in a low voice). There sits he still. (Holding SIGURD back.)
Nay, speak not to him!

  SIGURD. Thou say'st well; it is too soon; best leave him!

  DAGNY (goes over to the right, and gazes at her father in quiet
sorrow). So strong was he yesterday when he bore Thorolf's body on
his back; strong was he as he helped to heap the grave-mound; but
when they were all laid to rest, and earth and stones piled over
them--then the sorrow seized him; then seemed it of a sudden as
though his fire were quenched. (Dries her tears.) Tell me, Sigurd,
when thinkest thou to fare homeward to Iceland?

  SIGURD. So soon as the storm abates, and my quarrel with Gunnar
is ended.

  DAGNY. And then wilt thou buy land and build thee a homestead, and
go a-viking no more?

  SIGURD. Yes, yes,--that have I promised.

  DAGNY. And I may believe without doubt that Hiordis spoke falsely
when she said that I was unworthy to be thy wife?

  SIGURD. Yes yes, Dagny, trust thou to my word.

  DAGNY. Then am I glad again, and will try to forget all the evil
that here has been wrought. In the long winter evenings we will talk
together of Gunnar and Hiordis, and----

  SIGURD. Nay, Dagny, wouldst thou have things go well with us, do
thou never speak Hiordis' name when we sit together in Iceland.

  DAGNY (mildly upbraiding him). Unjust is thy hatred towards her.
Sigurd, Sigurd, it is unlike thee.

  ONE OF THE MEN (approaching). There now, the mound is finished.

  ORNULF (as if awaking). The mound? Is it--ay, ay----

  SIGURD. Now speak to him, Dagny.

  DAGNY (approaching). Father, it is cold out here; a storm is
gathering to-night.

  ORNULF. Hm; heed it not; the mound is close-heaped and crannyless;
they lie warm in there.

  DAGNY. Ay, but thou----

  ORNULF. I? I am not cold.

  DAGNY. Nought hast thou eaten today; wilt thou not go in? The
supper-board stands ready.

  ORNULF. Let the supper-board stand; I have no hunger.

  DAGNY. But to sit here so still--trust me, thou wilt take hurt of
it; thou art ever wont to be stirring.

  ORNULF. True, true; there is somewhat that crushes my breast; I
cannot draw breath.

    (He hides his face in his hands. A pause. DAGNY seats herself
      beside him.)

  DAGNY. To-morrow wilt thou make ready thy ship and set forth for
Iceland?

  ORNULF (without looking up). What should I do there? Nay, I will
to my sons.

  DAGNY (with pain). Father!

  ORNULF (raises his head). Go in and let me sit here; when the storm
has played with me for a night or two, the game will be over, I ween.

  SIGURD. Thou canst not think to deal thus with thyself.

  ORNULF. Dost marvel that I fain would rest? My day's work is done;
I have laid my sons in their grave. (Vehemently.) Go from me!--Go, go!

    (He hides his face.)

  SIGURD (softly, to DAGNY, who rises). Let him sit yet a while.

  DAGNY. Nay, I have one rede yet untried;--I know him. (To Ornulf.)
Thy day's work done, say'st thou? Nay, that it is not. Thou hast laid
thy sons in the grave;--but art thou not a skald? It is meet that thou
should'st sing their memory.

  ORNULF (shaking his head). Sing? Nay, nay; yesterday I could sing;
I am too old to-day.

  DAGNY. But needs must thou; honourable men were thy sons, one and
all; a song must be made of them, and that can none of our kin but
thou.

  ORNULF (looks inquiringly at SIGURD). To sing? What thinkest
_thou_, Sigurd?

  SIGURD. Meseems it is but meet; thou must e'en do as she says.

  DAGNY. Thy neighbours in Iceland will deem it ill done when the
grave-ale is drunk over Ornulf's children, and there is no song
to sing with it. Thou hast ever time enough to follow thy sons.

  ORNULF. Well well, I will try it; and thou, Dagny, give heed, that
afterwards thou may'st carve the song on staves.

    (The men approach with the torches, forming a group around him;
      he is silent for a time, reflecting; then he says:)

        Bragi's[1] gift is bitter
        when the heart is broken;
        sorrow-laden singer,
        singing, suffers sorely.

        Natheless, since the Skald-god
        gave me skill in song-craft,
        in a lay loud-ringing
        be my loss lamented!

                   (Rises.)

        Ruthless Norn[2] and wrathful
        wrecked my life and ravaged,
        wiled away my welfare,
        wasted Ornulf's treasure.

        Sons had Ornulf seven,
        by the great gods granted;--
        lonely now and life-sick
        goes the greybeard, sonless.

        Seven sons so stately,
        bred among the sword-blades,
        made a mighty bulwark
        round the snow-locked sea-king.

        Levelled lies the bulwark,
        dead my swordsmen seven;
        gone the greybeard's gladness,
        desolate his dwelling.

        Thorolf,--thou my last-born!
        Of the bold the boldest!
        Soon were spent my sorrow
        so but thou wert left me!

        Fair thou wast as springtide,
        fond towards thy father,
        waxing straight and stalwart
        to so wight a warrior.

        Dark and drear his death-wound
        leaves my life's lone evening;
        grief hath gripped my bosom
        as 'twixt hurtling targes.

        Nought the Norn denied me
        of her rueful riches,
        showering woes unstinted
        over Ornulf's world-way.

        Weak are now my weapons.
        But, were god-might given me,
        then, oh Norn, I swear it,
        scarce should'st thou go scatheless!

        Dire were then my vengeance;
        then had dawned thy doomsday,
        Norn, that now hast left me
        nought but yonder grave-mound.

        Nought, I said? Nay, truly,
        somewhat still is Ornulf's,
        since of Suttung's[3] mead-horn
        he betimes drank deeply.

          (With rising enthusiasm.)

        Though she stripped me sonless,
        one great gift she gave me--
        songcraft's mighty secret,
        skill to sing my sorrows.

        On my lips she laid it,
        goodly gift of songcraft;
        loud, then, let my lay sound,
        e'en where they are lying!

        Hail, my stout sons seven!
        Hail, as homeward ride ye!
        Songcraft's glorious god-gift
        stauncheth woe and wailing.

    [1] Bragi, the god of poetry and eloquence.
    [2] See note, p. 175 [The "Nornir" were the Fates of northern
  mythology.]
    [3] Suttung was a giant who kept guard over the magic mead of
  poetical inspiration.

    (He draws a deep breath, throws back the hair from his brow, and
      says calmly:)

  So--so; now is Ornulf sound and strong again. (To the men.) Follow
me to the supper-board, lads; we have had a heavy day's work!

    (Goes with the men into the boat-house.)

  DAGNY. Praised be the Mighty Ones on high that gave me so good a
rede. (To SIGURD.) Wilt thou not go in?

  SIGURD. Nay, I list not to. Tell me, are all things ready for
to-morrow?

  DAGNY. They are; a silk-sewn shroud lies on the bench; but I know
full surely that thou wilt hold thee against Gunnar, so I have not
wept over it.

  SIGURD. Grant all good powers, that thou may'st never weep for my
sake. (He stops and looks out.)

  DAGNY. What art thou listening to?

  SIGURD. Hear'st thou nought--_there?_

    (Points towards the left.)

  DAGNY. Ay, there goes a fearsome storm over the sea!

  SIGURD (going up a little towards the background). Hm, there will
fall hard hailstones in that storm. (Shouts.) Who comes?

  KARE THE PEASANT (without on the left). Folk thou wot'st of, Sigurd
Viking!

    (KARE THE PEASANT, with a band of armed men, enters from the left.)

  SIGURD. Whither would ye?

  KARE. To Gunnar's hall.

  SIGURD. As foemen?

  KARE. Ay, trust me for that! Thou didst hinder me before; but now
I ween thou wilt scarce do the like.

  SIGURD. Maybe not.

  KARE. I have heard of thy challenge to Gunnar; but if things go to
my mind, weak will be his weapons when the time comes for your meeting.

  SIGURD. 'Tis venturesome work thou goest about; take heed for
thyself, Peasant!

  KARE (with defiant laughter). Leave that to me; if thou wilt tackle
thy ship to-night, we will give thee light for the task!--Come, all
my men; here goes the way.

    (They go off to the right, at the back.)

  DAGNY. Sigurd, Sigurd, this misdeed must thou hinder.

  SIGURD (goes quickly to the door of the hut, and calls in). Up from
the board, Ornulf; take vengeance on Kare the Peasant.

  ORNULF (comes out, with the rest). Kare the Peasant--where is he?

  SIGURD. He is making for Gunnar's hall to burn it over their heads.

  ORNULF. Ha-ha--let him do as he will; so shall I be avenged on
Gunnar and Hiordis, and afterwards I can deal with Kare.

  SIGURD. Ay, that rede avails not; wouldst thou strike at Kare,
thou must seek him out to-night; for when his misdeed is done, he
will take to the mountains. I have challenged Gunnar to single
combat; him thou hast safely enough, unless I myself--but no matter.--
To-night he must be shielded from his foes; it would ill befit thee
to let such a dastard as Kare rob thee of thy revenge.

  ORNULF. Thou say'st truly. To-night will I shield the slayer of
Thorolf; but to-morrow he must die.

  SIGURD. He or I--doubt not of that!

  ORNULF. Come then, to take vengeance for Ornulf's sons.

    (He goes out with his men by the back, to the right.)

  SIGURD. Dagny, do thou follow them;--I must bide here; for the
rumour of the combat is already abroad, and I may not meet Gunnar
ere the time comes. But thou--do thou keep rein on thy father; he
must go honourably to work; in Gunnar's hall there are many women;
no harm must befall Hiordis or the rest.

  DAGNY. Yes, I will follow them. Thou hast a kind thought even for
Hiordis; I thank thee.

  SIGURD. Go, go, Dagny!

  DAGNY. I go; but be thou at ease as to Hiordis; she has gilded
armour in her bower, and will know how to shield herself.

  SIGURD. That deem I too; but go thou nevertheless; guide thy
father's course; watch over all--and over Gunnar's wife!

  DAGNY. Trust to me. Farewell, till we meet again.

    (She follows the others.)

  SIGURD. 'Tis the first time, foster-brother, that I stand weaponless
whilst thou art in danger. (Listens.) I hear shouts and sword-strokes;
--they are already at the hall. (Goes towards the right, but stops and
recoils in astonishment.) Hiordis! Comes she hither!

    (HIORDIS enters, clad in a short scarlet kirtle, with gilded armour:
      helmet, hauberk, arm-plates, and greaves. Her hair is flying
      loose; at her back hangs a quiver, and at her belt a small shield.
      She has in her hand the bow strung with her hair.)

  HIORDIS (hastily looking behind her, as though in dread of something
pursuing her, goes close up to SIGURD, seizes him by the arm, and
whispers:) Sigurd, Sigurd, canst thou see it?

  SIGURD. What? Where ?

  HIORDIS. The wolf there--close behind me; it does not move; it
glares at me with its two red eyes. It is my wraith,[1], Sigurd!
Three times has it appeared to me; that bodes that I shall surely
die to-night!

    [1] The word "wraith" is here used in an obviously inexact sense;
  but the wraith seemed to be the nearest equivalent in English
  mythology to the Scandinavian "fylgie," an attendant spirit, often
  regarded as a sort of emanation from the person it accompanied, and
  sometimes (as in this case) typifying that person's moral attributes.

  SIGURD. Hiordis, Hiordis!

  HIORDIS. It has sunk into the earth! Yes, yes, now it has warned me.

  SIGURD. Thou art sick; come, go in with me.

  HIORDIS. Nay, here will I bide; I have but little time left.

  SIGURD. What has befallen thee?

  HIORDIS. What has befallen? That know I not; but true was it what
thou said'st to-day, that Gunnar and Dagny stand between us; we must
away from them and from life: then can we be together!

  SIGURD. We? Ha, thou meanest----!

  HIORDIS (with dignity). I have been homeless in this world from that
day thou didst take another to wife. That was ill done of thee! All
good gifts may a man give his faithful friend--all, save the woman he
loves; for if he do that, he rends the Norn's secret web, and two lives
are wrecked. An unerring voice within me tells me I came into the
world that my strong soul might cheer and sustain thee through heavy
days, and that thou wast born to the end I might find in _one_ man
all that seemed to me great and noble; for this I know Sigurd--had we
two held together, thou hadst become more famous than all others, and
I happier.

  SIGURD. It avails not now to mourn. Thinkest thou it is a merry
life that awaits me? To be by Dagny's side day be day, and feign a
love my heart shrinks from? Yet so it must be; it cannot be altered.

  HIORDIS (in a growing frenzy). It _shall_ be altered! We must out
of this life, both of us! Seest thou this bow-string? With it can I
surely hit my mark; for I have crooned fair sorceries over it! (Places
an arrow in the bow, which is strung.) Hark! hearest thou that rushing
in the air? It is the dead men's ride to Nalhal: I have bewitched
them hither;--we two will join them in their ride!

  SIGURD (shrinking back). Hiordis, Hiordis--I fear thee!

  HIORDIS (not heeding him). Our fate no power can alter now! Oh, 'tis
better so than if thou hadst wedded me here in this life--if I had
sat in thy homestead weaving linen and wool for thee and bearing thee
children--pah!

  SIGURD. Hold, hold! Thy sorcery has been too strong for thee; thou
art soul-sick, Hiordis! (Horror-struck.) Ha, see--see! Gunnar's hall--
it is burning!

  HIORDIS. Let it burn, let it burn! The cloud-hall up yonder is
loftier than Gunnar's rafter-roof!

  SIGURD. But Egil, thy son--they are slaying him!

  HIORDIS. Let him die--my shame dies with him!

  SIGURD. And Gunnar--they are taking thy husband's life!

  HIORDIS. What care I! A better husband shall I follow home this
night! Ay, Sigurd, so must it be; here on this earth is no happiness
for me. The White God is coming northward; him will I not meet; the
old gods are strong no longer;--they sleep, they sit half shadow-
high;--with them will we strive! Out of this life, Sigurd; I will
enthrone thee king in heaven, and I will sit at thy side. (The storm
bursts wildly.) Hark, hark, here comes our company! Canst see the
black steeds galloping?--one is for me and one for thee. (Draws the
arrow to her ear and shoots.) Away, then, on thy last ride home!

  SIGURD. Well aimed, Hiordis!

    (He falls.)

  HIORDIS (jubilant, rushes up to him). Sigurd, my brother,--now art
thou mine at last!

  SIGURD. Now less than ever. Here our ways part; for I am a
Christian man.

  HIORDIS (appalled). Thou----! Ha, no, no!

  SIGURD. The White God is mine; King AEthelstan taught me to know
him; it is to him I go.

  HIORDIS (in despair). And I----! (Drops her bow.) Woe! woe!

  SIGURD. Heavy has my life been from the hour I tore thee out of my
own heart and gave thee to Gunnar. Thanks, Hiordis;--now am I so light
and free.

    (Dies.)

  HIORDIS (quietly). Dead! Then truly have I brought my soul to wreck!
(The storm increases; she breaks forth wildly.) They come! I have
bewitched them hither! No, no! I will not go with you! I will not ride
without Sigurd! It avails not--they see me; they laugh and beckon to
me; they spur their horses! (Rushes out to the edge of the cliff at
the back.) They are upon me;--and no shelter no hiding- place! Ay,
mayhap at the bottom of the sea!

    (She casts herself over.)
    (ORNULF, DAGNY, GUNNAR, with EGIL, followed by SIGURD'S and
      ORNULF'S men, gradually enter from the right.)

  ORNULF (turning towards the grave-mound). Now may ye sleep in peace;
for ye lie not unavenged.

  DAGNY (entering). Father, father--I die of fear--all that bloody
strife--and the storm;--hark, hark!

  GUNNAR (carrying EGIL). Peace, and shelter for my child!

  ORNULF. Gunnar!

  GUNNAR. Ay, Ornulf, my homestead is burnt and my men are slain; I
am in thy power; do with me what thou wilt!

  ORNULF. That Sigurd must look to. But in, under roof! It is not
safe out here.

  DAGNY. Ay, in, in! (Goes towards the boat-house, catches sight of
SIGURD'S body, and shrieks.) Sigurd, my husband!--They have slain him!
(Throwing herself upon him.)

  ORNULF (rushes up). Sigurd!

  GUNNAR (sets EGIL down). Sigurd dead!

  DAGNY (looks despairingly at the men, who surround the body). No,
no, it is not so;--he must be alive! (Catches sight of the bow.) Ha,
what is that? (Rises.)

  ORNULF. Daughter, it is as first thou saidst--Sigurd is slain.

  GUNNAR (as if seized by a sudden thought). And Hiordis!--Has Hiordis
been here?

  DAGNY (softly and with self-control). I know not; but this I know,
that her bow has been here.

  GUNNAR. Ay, I thought as much!

  DAGNY. Hush, hush! (To herself.) So bitterly did she hate him!

  GUNNAR (aside). She has slain him--the night before the combat; then
she loved me after all.

    (A thrill of dread runs through the whole group; ASGARDSREIEN--the
      ride of the fallen heroes to Valhal--hurtles through the air.)

  EGIL (in terror). Father! See, see!

  GUNNAR. What is it?

  EGIL. Up there--all the black horses----!

  GUNNAR. It is the clouds that----

  ORNULF. Nay, it is the dead men's home-faring.

  EGIL (with a shriek). Mother is with them!

  DAGNY. All good spirits!

  GUNNAR. Child, what say'st thou?

  EGIL. There--in front--on the black horse! Father, father!

    (EGIL clings in terror to his father; a short pause; the storm
      passes over, the clouds part, the moon shines peacefully on
      the scene.)

  GUNNAR (in quiet sorrow). Now is Hiordis surely dead!

  ORNULF. So it must be, Gunnar;--and my vengeance was rather against
her than thee. Dear has this meeting been to both of us;---- ----
there is my hand; be there peace between us!

  GUNNAR. Thanks, Ornulf! And now aboard; I sail with thee to Iceland.

  ORNULF. Ay, to Iceland! Long will it be ere our forth-faring is
forgotten.

       Weapon wielding warrior's meeting,
       woeful by the northern seaboard,
       still shall live in song and saga
       while our stem endure in Iceland.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Vikings of Helgeland, by Henrik Ibsen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIKINGS OF HELGELAND ***

***** This file should be named 19205.txt or 19205.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/2/0/19205/

Produced by Douglas Levy

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
