The Feast at Solhoug~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Feast at Solhoug, by Henrik Ibsen,
Translated by William Archer and Mary Morrison


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Feast at Solhoug


Author: Henrik Ibsen



Release Date: May 21, 2006  [eBook #18428]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FEAST AT SOLHOUG***


E-text prepared by Douglas Levy



THE FEAST AT SOLHOUG.

by

HENRIK IBSEN

From The Collected Works of Henrik Ibsen, Volume 1
Revised and Edited by William Archer

Translation by William Archer and Mary Morrison







INTRODUCTION*


Exactly a year after the production of _Lady Inger of Ostrat_--that
is to say on the "Foundation Day" of the Bergen Theatre, January 2,
1866--_The Feast at Solhoug_ was produced.  The poet himself has
written its history in full in the Preface to the second edition.
The only comment that need be made upon his rejoinder to his critics
has been made, with perfect fairness as it seems to me, by George
Brandes in the following passage:** "No one who is unacquainted with
the Scandinavian languages can fully understand the charm that the
style and melody of the old ballads exercise upon the Scandinavian
mind.  The beautiful ballads and songs of _Des Knaben Wunderhorn_
have perhaps had a similar power over German minds; but, as far as
I am aware, no German poet has has ever succeeded in inventing a
metre suitable for dramatic purposes, which yet retained the
mediaeval ballad's sonorous swing and rich aroma.  The explanation
of the powerful impression produced in its day by Henrik Hertz's
_Svend Dyring's House_ is to be found in the fact that in it, for
the first time, the problem was solved of how to fashion a metre
akin to that of the heroic ballads, a metre possessing as great
mobility as the verse of the _Niebelungenlied_, along with a
dramatic value not inferior to that of the pentameter.  Henrik
Ibsen, it is true, has justly pointed out that, as regards the
mutual relations of the principal characters, _Svend Dyring's
House_ owes more to Kleist's _Kathchen von Heubronn_ than _The
Feast at Solhoug_ owes to _Svend Dyring's House_.  But the fact
remains that the versified parts of the dialogue of both _The Feast
at Solhoug_ and _Olaf Liliekrans_ are written in that imitation
of the tone and style of the heroic ballad, of which Hertz was
the happily-inspired originator.  There seems to me to be no
depreciation whatever of Ibsen in the assertion of Hertz's right
to rank as his model.  Even the greatest must have learnt from
some one."

But while the influence of Danish lyrical romanticism is apparent
in the style of the play, the structure, as it seems to me, shows no
less clearly that influence of the French plot-manipulators which
we found so unmistakably at work in _Lady Inger_.  Despite its
lyrical dialogue, _The Feast at Solhoug_ has that crispiness of
dramatic action which marks the French plays of the period.  It may
indeed be called Scribe's _Bataille de Dames_ writ tragic.  Here,
as in the _Bataille de Dames_ (one of the earliest plays produced
under Ibsen's supervision), we have the rivalry of an older and a
younger woman for the love of a man who is proscribed on an unjust
accusation, and pursued by the emissaries of the royal power.  One
might even, though this would be forcing the point, find an analogy
in the fact that the elder woman (in both plays a strong and
determined character) has in Scribe's comedy a cowardly suitor,
while in Ibsen's tragedy, or melodrama, she has a cowardly husband.
In every other respect the plays are as dissimilar as possible; yet
it seems to me far from unlikely that an unconscious reminiscence
of the _Bataille de Dames_ may have contributed to the shaping of
_The Feast at Solhoug_ in Ibsen's mind.  But more significant than
any resemblance of theme is the similarity of Ibsen's whole method
to that of the French school--the way, for instance, in which
misunderstandings are kept up through a careful avoidance of the
use of proper names, and the way in which a cup of poison, prepared
for one person, comes into the hands of another person, is, as a
matter of fact, drunk by no one but occasions the acutest agony to
the would-be poisoner.  All this ingenious dovetailing of incidents
and working-up of misunderstandings, Ibsen unquestionably learned
from the French.  The French language, indeed, is the only one which
has a word--_quiproquo_--to indicate the class of misunderstanding
which, from _Lady Inger_ down to the _League of Youth_, Ibsen
employed without scruple.

Ibsen's first visit to the home of his future wife took place after
the production of _The Feast at Solhoug_.  It seems doubtful whether
this was actually his first meeting with her; but at any rate we
can scarcely suppose that he knew her during the previous summer,
when he was writing his play.  It is a curious coincidence, then,
that he should have found in Susanna Thoresen and her sister Marie
very much the same contrast of characters which had occupied him
in his first dramatic effort, _Catilina_, and which had formed
the main subject of the play he had just produced.  It is less
wonderful that the same contrast should so often recur in his later
works, even down to _John Gabriel Borkman_.  Ibsen was greatly
attached to his gentle and retiring sister-in-law, who died
unmarried in 1874.

_The Feast at Solhoug_ has been translated by Miss Morison and
myself, only because no one else could be found to undertake the
task.  We have done our best; but neither of us lays claim to any
great metrical skill, and the light movement of Ibsen's verse is
often, if not always, rendered in a sadly halting fashion.  It is,
however, impossible to exaggerate the irregularity of the verse
in the original, or its defiance of strict metrical law.  The
normal line is one of four accents: but when this is said, it is
almost impossible to arrive at any further generalisation.  There
is a certain lilting melody in many passages, and the whole play
has not unfairly been said to possess the charm of a northern
summer night, in which the glimmer of twilight gives place only
to the gleam of morning.  But in the main (though much better than
its successor, _Olaf Liliekrans_) it is the weakest thing that
Ibsen admitted into the canon of his works.  He wrote it in 1870
as "a study which I now disown"; and had he continued in that
frame of mind, the world would scarcely have quarrelled with his
judgment.  At worst, then, my collaborator and I cannot be accused
of marring a masterpiece; but for which assurance we should probably
have shrunk from the attempt.

                                                   W. A.

*Copyright, 1907, by Charles Scribner's Sons.
**_Ibsen and Bjornson_.  London, Heinmann, 1899, p.88




THE FEAST AT SOLHOUG (1856)



THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


PREFACE


I wrote _The Feast at Solhoug_ in Bergen in the summer of 1855--that
is to say, about twenty-eight years ago.

The play was acted for the first time on January 2, 1856, also at
Bergen, as a gala performance on the anniversary of the foundation
of the Norwegian Stage.

As I was then stage-manager of the Bergen Theatre, it was I myself
who conducted the rehearsals of my play.  It received an excellent,
a remarkably sympathetic interpretation.  Acted with pleasure and
enthusiasm, it was received in the same spirit.  The "Bergen
emotionalism," which is said to have decided the result of the
latest elections in those parts, ran high that evening in the
crowded theatre.  The performance ended with repeated calls for
the author and for the actors.  Later in the evening I was serenaded
by the orchestra, accompanied by a great part of the audience.  I
almost think that I went so far as to make some kind of speech
from my window; certain I am that I felt extremely happy.

A couple of months later, _The Feast of Solhoug_ was played in
Christiania.  There also it was received by the public with much
approbation, and the day after the first performance Bjornson wrote
a friendly, youthfully ardent article on it in the _Morgenblad_.  It
was not a notice or criticism proper, but rather a free, fanciful
improvisation on the play and the performance.

On this, however, followed the real criticism, written by the
real critics.

How did a man in the Christiania of those days--by which I mean
the years between 1850 and 1860, or thereabouts--become a real
literary, and in particular dramatic, critic?

As a rule, the process was as follows: After some preparatory
exercises in the columns of the _Samfundsblad_, and after the
play, the future critic betook himself to Johan Dahl's bookshop
and ordered from Copenhagen a copy of J. L. Heiberg's _Prose
Works_, among which was to be found--so he had heard it said--an
essay entitled _On the Vaudeville_.  This essay was in due course
read, ruminated on, and possibly to a certain extent understood.
From Heiberg's writings the young man, moreover, learned of a
controversy which that author had carried on in his day with
Professor Oehlenschlager and with the Soro poet, Hauch.  And he
was simultaneously made aware that J. L. Baggesen (the author of
_Letters from the Dead_) had at a still earlier period made a
similar attack on the great author who wrote both _Axel and Valborg_
and _Hakon Jarl_.

A quantity of other information useful to a critic was to be
extracted from these writings.  From them one learned, for instance,
that taste obliged a good critic to be scandalised by a hiatus.
Did the young critical Jeronimuses of Christiania encounter such
a monstrosity in any new verse, they were as certain as their
prototype in Holberg to shout their "Hoity-toity! the world will
not last till Easter!"

The origin of another peculiar characteristic of the criticism then
prevalent in the Norwegian capital was long a puzzle to me.  Every
time a new author published a book or had a little play acted, our
critics were in the habit of flying into an ungovernable passion
and behaving as if the publication of the book or the performance
of the play were a mortal insult to themselves and the newspapers
in which they wrote.  As already remarked, I puzzled long over this
peculiarity.  At last I got to the bottom of the matter.  Whilst
reading the Danish _Monthly Journal of Literature_ I was struck by
the fact that old State-Councillor Molbech was invariably seized
with a fit of rage when a young author published a book or had a
play acted in Copenhagen.

Thus, or in a manner closely resembling this, had the tribunal
qualified itself, which now, in the daily press, summoned _The
Feast at Solhoug_ to the bar of criticism in Christiania.  It was
principally composed of young men who, as regards criticism, lived
upon loans from various quarters.  Their critical thought had long
ago been thought and expressed by others; their opinions had long
ere now been formulated elsewhere.  Their aesthetic principles were
borrowed; their critical method was borrowed; the polemical tactics
they employed were borrowed in every particular, great and small.
Their very frame of mind was borrowed.  Borrowing, borrowing, here,
there, and everywhere!  The single original thing about them was
that they invariably made a wrong and unseasonable application of
their borrowings.

It can surprise no one that this body, the members of which, as
critics, supported themselves by borrowing, should have presupposed
similar action on my part, as author.  Two, possibly more than
two, of the newspapers promptly discovered that I had borrowed
this, that, and the other thing form Henrik Hertz's play, _Svend
Dyring's House_.

This is a baseless and indefensible critical assertion.  It is
evidently to be ascribed to the fact that the metre of the ancient
ballads is employed in both plays.  But my tone is quite different
from Hertz's; the language of my play has a different ring; a
light summer breeze plays over the rhythm of my verse: over that
or Hertz's brood the storms of autumn.

Nor, as regards the characters, the action, and the contents of
the plays generally, is there any other or any greater resemblance
between them than that which is a natural consequence of the
derivation of the subjects of both from the narrow circle of
ideas in which the ancient ballads move.

It might be maintained with quite as much, or even more, reason
that Hertz in his _Svend Dyring's House_ had borrowed, and that
to no inconsiderable extent, from Heinrich von Kleist's _Kathchen
von Heilbronn_, a play written at the beginning of this century.
Kathchen's relation to Count Wetterstrahl is in all essentials
the same as Tagnhild's to the knight, Stig Hvide.  Like Ragnhild,
Kathchen is compelled by a mysterious, inexplicable power to follow
the man she loves wherever he goes, to steal secretly after him,
to lay herself down to sleep near him, to come back to him, as by
some innate compulsion, however often she may be driven away.  And
other instances of supernatural interference are to be met with
both in Kleist's and in Hertz's play.

But does any one doubt that it would be possible, with a little
good--or a little ill-will, to discover among still older dramatic
literature a play from which it could be maintained that Kleist had
borrowed here and there in his _Kathchen von Heilbronn_?  I, for
my part, do not doubt it.  But such suggestions of indebtedness
are futile.  What makes a work of art the spiritual property of
its creator is the fact that he has imprinted on it the stamp of
his own personality.  Therefore I hold that, in spite of the
above-mentioned points of resemblance, _Svend Dyring's House_ is
as incontestably and entirely an original work by Henrick Hertz as
_Katchen von Heilbronn_ is an original work by Heinrich von Kleist.

I advance the same claim on my own behalf as regards _The Feast at
Solhoug_, and I trust that, for the future, each of the three
namesakes* will be permitted to keep, in its entirety, what
rightfully belongs to him.

In writing _The Feast of Solhoug_ in connection with _Svend Dyring's
House_, George Brandes expresses the opinion, not that the former
play is founded upon any idea borrowed from the latter, but that it
has been written under an influence exercised by the older author
upon the younger.  Brandes invariably criticises my work in such a
friendly spirit that I have all reason to be obliged to him for
this suggestion, as for so much else.

Nevertheless I must maintain that he, too, is in this instance
mistaken.  I have never specially admired Henrik Hertz as a dramatist.
Hence it is impossible for me to believe that he should, unknown to
myself, have been able to exercise any influence on by dramatic
production.

As regards this point and the matter in general, I might confine
myself to referring those interested to the writings of Dr. Valfrid
Vasenius, lecturer on Aesthetics at the University of Helsingfors.
In the thesis which gained him his degree of Doctor of Philosophy,
_Henrik Ibsen's Dramatic Poetry in its First stage_ (1879), and
also in _Henrik Ibsen: The Portrait of a Skald_ (Jos. Seligman &
Co., Stockholm, 1882), Valsenious states and supports his views on
the subject of the play at present in question, supplementing them
in the latter work by what I told him, very briefly, when we were
together at Munich three years ago.

But, to prevent all misconception, I will now myself give a short
account of the origin of _The Feast at Solhoug_.

I began this Preface with the statement that _The Feast at Solhoug_
was written in the summer 1855.

In 1854 I had written _Lady Inger of Ostrat_.  This was a task
which had obliged me to devote much attention to the literature
and history of Norway during the Middle Ages, especially the latter
part of that period.  I did my utmost to familiarise myself with
the manners and customs, with the emotions, thought, and language
of the men of those days.

The period, however, is not one over which the student is tempted
to linger, nor does it present much material suitable for dramatic
treatment.

Consequently I soon deserted it for the Saga period.  But the Sagas
of the Kings, and in general the more strictly historical traditions
of that far-off age, did not attract me greatly; at that time I was
unable to put the quarrels between kings and chieftains, parties and
clans, to any dramatic purpose.  This was to happen later.

In the Icelandic "family" Sagas, on the other hand, I found in
abundance what I required in the shape of human garb for the moods,
conceptions, and thoughts which at that time occupied me, or were,
at least, more or less distinctly present in my mind.  With these
Old Norse contributions to the personal history of our Saga period
I had had no previous acquaintance; I had hardly so much as heard
them named.  But now N. M. Petersen's excellent translation--
excellent, at least, as far as the style is concerned--fell into
my hands.  In the pages of these family chronicles, with their
variety of scenes and of relations between man and man, between
woman and woman, in short, between human being and human being,
there met me a personal, eventful, really living life; and as the
result of my intercourse with all these distinctly individual men
and women, there presented themselves to my mind's eye the first
rough, indistinct outlines of _The Vikings at Helgeland_.

How far the details of that drama then took shape, I am no longer
able to say.  But I remember perfectly that the two figures of
which I first caught sight were the two women who in course of
time became Hiordis and Dagny.  There was to be a great banquet
in the play, with passion-rousing, fateful quarrels during its
course.  Of other characters and passions, and situations produced
by these, I meant to include whatever seemed to me most typical
of the life which the Sagas reveal.  In short, it was my intention
to reproduce dramatically exactly what the Saga of the Volsungs
gives in epic form.

I made no complete, connected plan at that time; but it was evident
to me that such a drama was to be my first undertaking.

Various obstacles intervened.  Most of them were of a personal nature,
and these were probably the most decisive; but it undoubtedly had
its significance that I happened just at this time to make a careful
study of Landstad's collection of Norwegian ballads, published two
years previously.  My mood of the moment was more in harmony with
the literary romanticism of the Middle Ages than with the deeds
of the Sagas, with poetical than with prose composition, with the
word-melody of the ballad than with the characterisation of the Saga.

Thus it happened that the fermenting, formless design for the
tragedy, _The Vikings at Helgeland_, transformed itself temporarily
into the lyric drama, _The Feast at Solhoug_.

The two female characters, the foster sisters Hiordis and Dagny,
of the projected tragedy, became the sisters Margit and Signe of
the completed lyric drama.  The derivation of the latter pair from
the two women of the Saga at once becomes apparent when attention
is drawn to it.  The relationship is unmistakable.  The tragic
hero, so far only vaguely outlined, Sigurd, the far-travelled Viking,
the welcome guest at the courts of kings, became the knight and
minstrel, Gudmund Alfson, who has likewise been long absent in
foreign lands, and has lived in the king's household.  His attitude
towards the two sisters was changed, to bring it into accordance
with the change in time and circumstances; but the position of
both sisters to him remained practically the same as that in the
projected and afterwards completed tragedy.  The fateful banquet,
the presentation of which had seemed to me of the first importance
in my original plan, became in the drama the scene upon which its
personages made their appearance; it became the background against
which the action stood out, and communicated to the picture as a
whole the general tone at which I aimed.  The ending of the play
was, undoubtedly, softened and subdued into harmony with its
character as drama, not tragedy; but orthodox aestheticians may
still, perhaps, find it indisputable whether, in this ending, a
touch of pure tragedy has not been left behind, to testify to the
origin of the drama.

Upon this subject, however, I shall not enter at present.  My
object has simply been to maintain and prove that the play under
consideration, like all my other dramatic works, is an inevitable
outcome of the tenor of my life at a certain period.  It had its
origin within, and was not the result of any outward impression
or influence.

This, and no other, is the true account of the genesis of _The
Feast at Solhoug_.

Henrik Ibsen.
Rome, April, 1883.


*Heinrich von Kleist, Henrik Hertz, Henrik Ibsen.





THE FEAST AT SOLHOUG



CHARACTERS

  BENGT GAUTESON, Master of Solhoug.
  MARGIT, his wife.
  SIGNE, her sister.
  GUDMUND ALFSON, their kinsman.
  KNUT GESLING, the King's sheriff.
  ERIK OF HEGGE, his friend.
  A HOUSE-CARL.
  ANOTHER HOUSE-CARL.
  THE KING'S ENVOY.
  AN OLD MAN.
  A MAIDEN.
  GUESTS, both MEN and LADIES.
  MEN of KNUT GESLING'S TRAIN.
  SERVING-MEN and MAIDENS at SOLHOUG.


    The action passes at Solhoug in the Fourteenth Century.


  PRONUNCIATION OF NAMES:  Gudmund=Goodmund.  The g in "Margit"
  and in "Gesling" is hard, as in "go," or in "Gesling," it may
  be pronounced as y--"Yesling."  The first o in Solhoug ought
  to have the sound of a very long "oo."

Transcriber's notes:

--Signe and Hegge have umlauts above the e's, the
  ultimate e only in Hegge.
--Passages that are in lyric form are not indented
  and have the directorial comments to the right of
  the character's name.




THE FEAST AT SOLHOUG

PLAY IN THREE ACTS



ACT FIRST


A stately room, with doors in the back and to both sides.  In front
    on the right, a bay window with small round panes, set in lead,
    and near the window a table, on which is a quantity of feminine
    ornaments.  Along the left wall, a longer table with silver
    goblets and drinking-horns.  The door in the back leads out
    to a passage-way,* through which can be seen a spacious
    fiord-landscape.

BENGT GAUTESON, MARGIT, KNUT GESLING and ERIK OF HEGGE are seated
    around the table on the left.  In the background are KNUT's
    followers, some seated, some standing; one or two flagons of
    ale are handed round among them.  Far off are heard church
    bells, ringing to Mass.

*This no doubt means a sort of arcaded veranda running along the
outer wall of the house.



ERIK.

  [Rising at the table.]  In one word, now, what answer have you
to make to my wooing on Knut Gesling's behalf?


BENGT.

  [Glancing uneasily towards his wife.]  Well, I--to me it seems--
[As she remains silent.]  H'm, Margit, let us first hear your
thought in the matter.


MARGIT.

  [Rising.]  Sir Knut Gesling, I have long known all that Erik of
Hegge has told of you.  I know full well that you come of a lordly
house; you are rich in gold and gear, and you stand in high favour
with our royal master.


BENGT.

  [To KNUT.]  In high favour--so say I too.


MARGIT.

  And doubtless my sister could choose her no doughtier mate--


BENGT.

  None doughtier; that is what _I_ say too.


MARGIT.

  --If so be that you can win her to think kindly of you.


BENGT.

  [Anxiously, and half aside.]  Nay--nay, my dear wife--


KNUT.

  [Springing up.]  Stands it so, Dame Margit!  You think that your
sister--


BENGT.

  [Seeking to calm him.]  Nay, nay, Knut Gesling!  Have patience,
now.  You must understand us aright.


MARGIT.

  There is naught in my words to wound you.  My sister knows you
only by the songs that are made about you--and these songs sound
but ill in gentle ears.

  No peaceful home is your father's house.
    With your lawless, reckless crew,
  Day out, day in, must you hold carouse--
    God help her who mates with you.
  God help the maiden you lure or buy
    With gold and with forests green--
  Soon will her sore heart long to lie
    Still in the grave, I ween.


ERIK.

  Aye, aye--true enough--Knut Gesling lives not overpeaceably.  But
there will soon come a change in that, when he gets him a wife in
his hall.


KNUT.

  And this I would have you mark, Dame Margit: it may be a week
since, I was at a feast at Hegge, at Erik's bidding, whom here
you see.  I vowed a vow that Signe, your fair sister, should be
my wife, and that before the year was out.  Never shall it be said
of Knut Gesling that he brake any vow.  You can see, then, that
you must e'en choose me for your sister's husband--be it with your
will or against it.


MARGIT.

Ere that may be, I must tell you plain,
You must rid yourself of your ravening train.
You must scour no longer with yell and shout
O'er the country-side in a galloping rout;
You must still the shudder that spreads around
When Knut Gesling is to a bride-ale bound.
Courteous must your mien be when a-feasting you ride;
Let your battle-axe hang at home at the chimney-side--
It ever sits loose in your hand, well you know,
When the mead has gone round and your brain is aglow.
From no man his rightful gear shall you wrest,
You shall harm no harmless maiden;
You shall send no man the shameless hest
That when his path crosses yours, he were best
Come with his grave-clothes laden.
And if you will so bear you till the year be past,
You may win my sister for your bride at last.


KNUT.

  [With suppressed rage.]  You know how to order your words
cunningly, Dame Margit.  Truly, you should have been a priest,
and not your husbands wife.


BENGT.

  Oh, for that matter, I too could--


KNUT.

  [Paying no heed to him.]  But I would have you take note that
had a sword-bearing man spoken to me in such wise--


BENGT.

  Nay, but listen, Knut Gesling--you must understand us!


KNUT.

  [As before.]  Well, briefly, he should have learnt that the axe
sits loose in my hand, as you said but now.


BENGT.

  [Softly.]  There we have it!  Margit, Margit, this will never
end well.


MARGIT.

  [To KNUT.]  You asked for a forthright answer, and that I have
given you.


KNUT.

  Well, well; I will not reckon too closely with you, Dame Margit.
You have more wit than all the rest of us together.  Here is my
hand;--it may be there was somewhat of reason in the keen-edged
words you spoke to me.


MARGIT.

  This I like well; now are you already on the right way to
amendment.  Yet one word more--to-day we hold a feast at Solhoug.


KNUT.

  A feast?


BENGT.

  Yes, Knut Gesling: you must know that it is our wedding day;
this day three years ago made me Dame Margit's husband.


MARGIT.

  [Impatiently, interrupting.]  As I said, we hold a feast to-day.
When Mass is over, and your other business done, I would have you
ride hither again, and join in the banquet.  Then you can learn
to know my sister.


KNUT.

  So be it, Dame Margit; I thank you.  Yet 'twas not to go to Mass
that I rode hither this morning.  Your kinsman, Gudmund Alfson,
was the cause of my coming.


MARGIT.

  [Starts.]  He!  My kinsman?  Where would you seek him?


KNUT.

  His homestead lies behind the headland, on the other side of
the fiord.


MARGIT.

  But he himself is far away.


ERIK.

  Be not so sure; he may be nearer than you think.


KNUT.

  [Whispers.]  Hold your peace!


MARGIT.

  Nearer?  What mean you?


KNUT.

  Have you not heard, then, that Gudmund Alfson has come back to
Norway?  He came with the Chancellor Audun of Hegranes, who was
sent to France to bring home our new Queen.


MARGIT.

  True enough, but in these very days the King holds his wedding-
feast in full state at Bergen, and there is Gudmund Alfson a guest.


BENGT.

  And there could we too have been guests had my wife so willed it.


ERIK.

  [Aside to KNUT.]  Then Dame Margit knows not that--?


KNUT.

  [Aside.]  So it would seem; but keep your counsel.  [Aloud.]
Well, well, Dame Margit, I must go my way none the less, and see
what may betide.  At nightfall I will be here again.


MARGIT.

  And then you must show whether you have power to bridle your
unruly spirit.


BENGT.

  Aye, mark you that.


MARGIT.

  You must lay no hand on your axe--hear you, Knut Gesling?


BENGT.

  Neither on your axe, nor on your knife, nor on any other
weapon whatsoever.


MARGIT.

  For then can you never hope to be one of our kindred.


BENGT.

  Nay, that is our firm resolve.


KNUT.

  [To MARGIT.]  Have no fear.


BENGT.

  And what we have firmly resolved stands fast.


KNUT.

  That I like well, Sir Bengt Gauteson.  I, too, say the same; and
I have pledged myself at the feast-board to wed your kinswoman.
You may be sure that my pledge, too, will stand fast.--God's peace
till to-night!

     [He and ERIK, with their men, go out at the back.
     [BENGT accompanies them to the door.  The sound of the bells
       has in the meantime ceased.


BENGT.

  [Returning.]  Methought he seemed to threaten us as he departed.


MARGIT.

  [Absently.]  Aye, so it seemed.


BENGT.

  Knut Gesling is an ill man to fall out with.  And when I bethink
me, we gave him over many hard words.  But come, let us not brood
over that.  To-day we must be merry, Margit!--as I trow we have
both good reason to be.


MARGIT.

  [With a weary smile.]  Aye, surely, surely.


BENGT.

  Tis true I was no mere stripling when I courted you.  But well
I wot I was the richest man for many and many a mile.  You were a
fair maiden, and nobly born; but your dowry would have tempted
no wooer.


MARGIT.

  [To herself.]  Yet was I then so rich.


BENGT.

  What said you, my wife?


MARGIT.

  Oh, nothing, nothing.  [Crosses to the right.]  I will deck
me with pearls and rings.  Is not to-night a time of rejoicing
for me?


BENGT.

  I am fain to hear you say it.  Let me see that you deck you
in your best attire, that our guests may say: Happy she who mated
with Bengt Gauteson.--But now must I to the larder; there are
many things to-day that must not be over-looked.

     [He goes out to the left.


MARGIT. [Sinks down on a chair by the table on the right.]

'Twas well he departed.  While here he remains
Meseems the blood freezes within my veins;
Meseems that a crushing mighty and cold
My heart in its clutches doth still enfold.
     [With tears she cannot repress.

He is my husband!  I am his wife!
How long, how long lasts a woman's life?
Sixty years, mayhap--God pity me
Who am not yet full twenty-three!
     [More calmly after a short silence.

Hard, so long in a gilded cage to pine;
Hard a hopeless prisoner's lot--and mine.
     [Absently fingering the ornaments on the table, and beginning
       to put them on.

With rings, and with jewels, and all of my best
By his order myself I am decking--
But oh, if to-day were my burial-feast,
'Twere little that I'd be recking.
     [Breaking off.

But if thus I brood I must needs despair;
I know a song that can lighten care.
     [She sings.

The Hill-King to the sea did ride;
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
To woo a maiden to be his bride.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--

The Hill-King rode to Sir Hakon's hold;
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
Little Kirsten sat combing her locks of gold.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--

The Hill-King wedded the maiden fair;
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
A silvern girdle she ever must wear.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--

The Hill-King wedded the lily-wand,
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
With fifteen gold rings on either hand.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--

Three summers passed, and there passed full five;
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
In the hill little Kirsten was buried alive.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--

Five summers passed, and there passed full nine;
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
Little Kirsten ne'er saw the glad sunshine.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--

In the dale there are flowers and the birds' blithe song;
   --Oh, sad are my days and dreary--
In the hill there is gold and the night is long.
   --I am waiting for thee, I am weary.--
     [She rises and crosses the room.

How oft in the gloaming would Gudmund sing
This song in may father's hall.
There was somewhat in it--some strange, sad thing
That took my heart in thrall;
Though I scarce understood, I could ne'er forget--
And the words and the thoughts they haunt me yet.
     [Stops horror-struck.

Rings of red gold!  And a belt beside--!
'Twas with gold the Hill-King wedded his bride!
     [In despair; sinks down on a bench beside the table on
       the left.

Woe!  Woe!  I myself am the Hill-King's wife!
And there cometh none to free me from the prison of my life.

     [SIGNE, radiant with gladness, comes running in from
       the back.

SIGNE.

  [Calling.]  Margit, Margit,--he is coming!


MARGIT.

  [Starting up.]  Coming?  Who is coming?


SIGNE.

  Gudmund, our kinsman!


MARGIT.

  Gudmund Alfson!  Here!  How can you think--?


SIGNE.

  Oh, I am sure of it.


MARGIT.

  [Crosses to the right.]  Gudmund Alfson is at the wedding-feast
in the King's hall; you know that as well as I.


SIGNE.

  Maybe; but none the less I am sure it was he.


MARGIT.

  Have you seen him?


SIGNE.

  Oh, no, no; but I must tell you--


MARGIT.

  Yes, haste you--tell on!


SIGNE.

'Twas early morn, and the church bells rang,
To Mass I was fain to ride;
The birds in the willows twittered and sang,
In the birch-groves far and wide.
All earth was glad in the clear, sweet day;
And from church it had well-nigh stayed me;
For still, as I rode down the shady way,
Each rosebud beguiled and delayed me.
Silently into the church I stole;
The priest at the altar was bending;
He chanted and read, and with awe in their soul,
The folk to God's word were attending.
Then a voice rang out o'er the fiord so blue;
And the carven angels, the whole church through,
Turned round, methought, to listen thereto.


MARGIT.

O Signe, say on!  Tell me all, tell me all!


SIGNE.

'Twas as though a strange, irresistible call
Summoned me forth from the worshipping flock,
Over hill and dale, over mead and rock.
'Mid the silver birches I listening trod,
Moving as though in a dream;
Behind me stood empty the house of God;
Priest and people were lured by the magic 'twould seem,
Of the tones that still through the air did stream.
No sound they made; they were quiet as death;
To hearken the song-birds held their breath,
The lark dropped earthward, the cuckoo was still,
As the voice re-echoed from hill to hill.


MARGIT.

Go on.


SIGNE.

They crossed themselves, women and men;
     [Pressing her hands to her breast.

But strange thoughts arose within me then;
For the heavenly song familiar grew:
Gudmund oft sang it to me and you--
Ofttimes has Gudmund carolled it,
And all he e'er sang in my heart is writ.


MARGIT.

And you think that it may be--?


SIGNE.

I know it is he!  I know it?  I know it!  You soon shall see!
     [Laughing.

From far-off lands, at the last, in the end,
Each song-bird homeward his flight doth bend!
I am so happy--though why I scarce know--!
Margit, what say you?  I'll quickly go
And take down his harp, that has hung so long
In there on the wall that 'tis rusted quite;
Its golden strings I will polish bright,
And tune them to ring and to sing with his song.


MARGIT. [Absently.]

Do as you will--


SIGNE. [Reproachfully.]

         Nay, this in not right.
     [Embracing her.

But when Gudmund comes will your heart grow light--
Light, as when I was a child, again.


MARGIT.

So much has changed--ah, so much!--since then--


SIGNE.

Margit, you shall be happy and gay!
Have you not serving-maids many, and thralls?
Costly robes hang in rows on your chamber walls;
How rich you are, none can say.
By day you can ride in the forest deep,
Chasing the hart and the hind;
By night in a lordly bower you can sleep,
On pillows of silk reclined.


MARGIT. [Looking toward the window.]

And he comes to Solhoug!  He, as a guest!


SIGNE.

What say you?


MARGIT. [Turning.]

           Naught.--Deck you out in your best.
That fortune which seemeth to you so bright
May await yourself.


SIGNE.

                     Margit, say what you mean!


MARGIT. [Stroking her hair.]

I mean--nay, no more!  'Twill shortly be seen--;
I mean--should a wooer ride hither to-night--?


SIGNE.

A wooer?  For whom?


MARGIT.

                    For you.


SIGNE. [Laughing.]

                             For me?
That he'd ta'en the wrong road full soon he would see.


MARGIT.

What would you say if a valiant knight
Begged for your hand?


SIGNE.

                    That my heart was too light
To think upon suitors or choose a mate.


MARGIT.

But if he were mighty, and rich, and great?


SIGNE.

O, were he a king, did his palace hold
Stores of rich garments and ruddy gold,
'Twould ne'er set my heart desiring.
With you I am rich enough here, meseeems,
With summer and sun and the murmuring streams,
And the birds in the branches quiring.
Dear sister mine--here shall my dwelling be;
And to give any wooer my hand in fee,
For that I am too busy, and my heart too full of glee!

     [SIGNE runs out to the left, singing.


MARGIT.

  [After a pause.]  Gudmund Alfson coming hither!  Hither--to
Solhoug?  No, no, it cannot be.--Signe heard him singing, she
said!  When I have heard the pine-trees moaning in the forest
afar, when I have heard the waterfall thunder and the birds
pipe their lure in the tree-tops, it has many a time seemed to
me as though, through it all, the sound of Gudmund's songs came
blended.  And yet he was far from here.--Signe has deceived
herself.  Gudmund cannot be coming.

     [BENGT enters hastily from the back.


BENGT.

  [Entering, calls loudly.]  An unlooked-for guest my wife!


MARGIT.

  What guest?


BENGT.

  Your kinsman, Gudmund Alfson!  [Calls through the doorway on the
right.]  Let the best guest-room be prepared--and that forthwith!


MARGIT.

  Is he, then, already here?


BENGT.

  [Looking out through the passage-way.]  Nay, not yet; but he
cannot be far off.  [Calls again to the right.]  The carved oak
bed, with the dragon-heads!  [Advances to MARGIT.]  His shield-
bearer brings a message of greeting from him; and he himself is
close behind.


MARGIT.

  His shield-bearer!  Comes he hither with a shield-bearer!


BENGT.

  Aye, by my faith he does.  He has a shield-bearer and six armed
men in his train.  What would you?  Gudmund Alfson is a far other
man than he was when he set forth to seek his fortune.  But I must
ride forth to seek him.  [Calls out.]  The gilded saddle on my horse!
And forget not the bridle with the serpents' heads!  [Looks out to
the back.]  Ha, there he is already at the gate!  Well, then, my
staff--my silver-headed staff!  Such a lordly knight--Heaven save
us!--we must receive him with honour, with all seemly honour!

     [Goes hastily out to the back.


MARGIT. [Brooding]

Alone he departed, a penniless swain;
With esquires and henchmen now comes he again.
What would he?  Comes he, forsooth, to see
My bitter and gnawing misery?
Would he try how long, in my lot accurst,
I can writhe and moan, ere my heart-strings burst--
Thinks he that--?  Ah, let him only try!
Full little joy shall he reap thereby.
     [She beckons through the doorway on the right.  Three
       handmaidens enter.

List, little maids, what I say to you:
Find me my silken mantle blue.
Go with me into my bower anon:
My richest of velvets and furs do on.
Two of you shall deck me in scarlet and vair,
The third shall wind pearl-strings into my hair.
All my jewels and gauds bear away with ye!
     [The handmaids go out to the left, taking the ornaments
       with them.

Since Margit the Hill-King's bride must be,
Well! don we the queenly livery!

     [She goes out to the left.
     [BENGT ushers in GUDMUND ALFSON, through the pent-house
       passage at the back.


BENGT.

  And now once more--welcome under Solhoug's roof, my wife's kinsman.


GUDMUND.

  I thank you.  And how goes it with her?  She thrives well in
every way, I make no doubt?


BENGT.

  Aye, you may be sure she does.  There is nothing she lacks.  She
has five handmaidens, no less, at her beck and call; a courser
stands ready saddled in the stall when she lists to ride abroad.
In one word, she has all that a noble lady can desire to make her
happy in her lot.


GUDMUND.

  And Margit--is she then happy?


BENGT.

  God and all men would think that she must be; but, strange
to say--


GUDMUND.

  What mean you?


BENGT.

  Well, believe it or not as you list, but it seems to me that
Margit was merrier of heart in the days of her poverty, than since
she became the lady of Solhoug.


GUDMUND.

  [To himself.]  I knew it; so it must be.


BENGT.

  What say you, kinsman?


GUDMUND.

  I say that I wonder greatly at what you tell me of your wife.


BENGT.

  Aye, you may be sure I wonder at it too.  On the faith and troth
of an honest gentleman, 'tis beyond me to guess what more she can
desire.  I am about her all day long; and no one can say of me
that I rule her harshly.  All the cares of household and husbandry
I have taken on myself; yet notwithstanding--  Well, well, you
were ever a merry heart; I doubt not you will bring sunshine with
you.  Hush! here comes Dame Margit!  Let her not see that I--

     [MARGIT enters from the left, richly dressed.


GUDMUND.

  [Going to meet her.]  Margit--my dear Margit!


MARGIT.

  [Stops, and looks at him without recognition.]  Your pardon, Sir
Knight; but--?  [As though she only now recognized him.]  Surely,
if I mistake not, 'tis Gudmund Alfson.

     [Holding out her hand to him.


GUDMUND.

  [Without taking it.]  And you did not at once know me again?


BENGT.

  [Laughing.]  Why, Margit, of what are you thinking?  I told you
but a moment agone that your kinsman--


MARGIT.

  [Crossing to the table on the right.]  Twelve years is a long
time, Gudmund.  The freshest plant may wither ten times over in
that space.


GUDMUND.

  'Tis seven years since last we met.


MARGIT.

  Surely it must be more than that.


GUDMUND.

  [Looking at her.]  I could almost think so.  But 'tis as I say.


MARGIT.

  How strange!  I must have been but a child then; and it seems to
me a whole eternity since I was a child.  [Throws herself down on
a chair.]  Well, sit you down, my kinsman!  Rest you, for to-night
you shall dance, and rejoice us with your singing.  [With a forced
smile.]  Doubtless you know we are merry here to-day--we are
holding a feast.


GUDMUND.

  'Twas told me as I entered your homestead.


BENGT.

  Aye, 'tis three years to-day since I became--


MARGIT.

  [Interrupting.]  My kinsman has already heard it.  [To GUDMUND.]
Will you not lay aside your cloak?


GUDMUND.

  I thank you, Dame Margit; but it seems to me cold here--colder
than I had foreseen.


BENGT.

  For my part, I am warm enough; but then I have a hundred things
to do and to take order for.  [To MARGIT.]  Let not the time seem
long to our guest while I am absent.  You can talk together of
the old days.

     [Going.


MARGIT.

  [Hesitating.]  Are you going?  Will you not rather--?


BENGT.

  [Laughing, to GUDMUND, as he comes forward again.]  See you well--
Sir Bengt of Solhoug is the man to make the women fain of him.
How short so e'er the space, my wife cannot abide to be without
me.  [To MARGIT, caressing her.]  Content you; I shall soon be
with you again.

     [He goes out to the back.


MARGIT.

  [To herself.]  Oh, torture, to have to endure it all.

     [A short silence.


GUDMUND.

How goes it, I pray, with your sister dear?


MARGIT.

Right well, I thank you.


GUDMUND.

                          They said she was here
With you.


MARGIT.

          She has been here ever since we--
     [Breaks off.

She came, now three years since, to Solhoug with me.
     [After a pause.

Ere long she'll be here, her friend to greet.


GUDMUND.

Well I mind me of Signe's nature sweet.
No guile she dreamed of, no evil knew.
When I call to remembrance her eyes so blue
I must think of the angels in heaven.
But of years there have passed no fewer than seven;
In that time much may have altered.  Oh, say
If she, too, has changed so while I've been away?


MARGIT.

She too?  Is it, pray, in the halls of kings
That you learn such courtly ways, Sir Knight?
To remind me thus of the change time brings--


GUDMUND.

Nay, Margit, my meaning you read aright!
You were kind to me, both, in those far-away years--
Your eyes, when we parted were wet with tears.
We swore like brother and sister still
To hold together in good hap or ill.
'Mid the other maids like a sun you shone,
Far, far and wide was your beauty known.
You are no less fair than you were, I wot;
But Solhoug's mistress, I see, has forgot
The penniless kinsman.  So hard is your mind
That ever of old was gentle and kind.


MARGIT. [Choking back her tears.]

Aye, of old--!


GUDMUND. [Looks compassionately at her, is silent for a little,
then says in a subdued voice.

              Shall we do as your husband said?
Pass the time with talk of the dear old days?


MARGIT. [Vehemently.]

No, no, not of them!
                     Their memory's dead.
My mind unwillingly backward strays.
Tell rather of what your life has been,
Of what in the wide world you've done and seen.
Adventures you've lacked not, well I ween--
In all the warmth and the space out yonder,
That heart and mind should be light, what wonder?


GUDMUND.

In the King's high hall I found not the joy
That I knew by my own poor hearth as a boy.


MARGIT. [Without looking at him.]

While I, as at Solhoug each day flits past,
Thank Heaven that here has my lot been cast.


GUDMUND.

'Tis well if for this you can thankful be--


MARGIT. [Vehemently.]

Why not?  For am I not honoured and free?
Must not all folk here obey my hest?
Rule I not all things as seemeth me best?
Here I am first, with no second beside me;
And that, as you know, from of old satisfied me.
Did you think you would find me weary and sad?
Nay, my mind is at peace and my heart is glad.
You might, then, have spared your journey here
To Solhoug; 'twill profit you little, I fear.


GUDMUND.

What, mean you, Dame Margit?


MARGIT. [Rising.]

          I understand all--
I know why you come to my lonely hall.


GUDMUND.

And you welcome me not, though you know why I came?
     [Bowing and about to go.

God's peace and farewell, then, my noble dame!


MARGIT.

To have stayed in the royal hall, indeed,
Sir Knight, had better become your fame.


GUDMUND. [Stops.]

In the royal hall?  Do you scoff at my need?


MARGIT.

Your need?  You are ill to content, my friend;
Where, I would know, do you think to end?
You can dress you in velvet and cramoisie,
You stand by the throne, and have lands in fee--


GUDMUND.

Do you deem, then, that fortune is kind to me?
You said but now that full well you knew
What brought me to Solhoug--


MARGIT.

          I told you true!


GUDMUND.

Then you know what of late has befallen me;--
You have heard the tale of my outlawry?


MARGIT. [Terror-struck.]

An outlaw!  You, Gudmund!


GUDMUND.

          I am indeed.
But I swear, by the Holy Christ I swear,
Had I known the thoughts of your heart, I ne'er
Had bent me to Solhoug in my need.
I thought that you still were gentle-hearted,
As you ever were wont to be ere we parted:
But I truckle not to you; the wood is wide,
My hand and my bow shall fend for me there;
I will drink of the mountain brook, and hide
My head in the beast's lair.

     [On the point of going.


MARGIT. [Holding him back.]

Outlawed!  Nay, stay!  I swear to you
That naught of your outlawry I knew.


GUDMUND.

It is as I tell you.  My life's at stake;
And to live are all men fain.
Three nights like a dog 'neath the sky I've lain,
My couch on the hillside forced to make,
With for pillow the boulder grey.
Though too proud to knock at the door of the stranger,
And pray him for aid in the hour of danger,
Yet strong was my hope as I held on my way:
I thought: When to Solhoug you come at last
Then all your pains will be done and past.
You have sure friends there, whatever betide.--
But hope like a wayside flower shrivels up;
Though your husband met me with flagon and cup,
And his doors flung open wide,
Within, your dwelling seems chill and bare;
Dark is the hall; my friends are not there.
'Tis well; I will back to my hills from your halls.


MARGIT. [Beseechingly.]

Oh, hear me!


GUDMUND.

             My soul is not base as a thrall's.
Now life to me seems a thing of nought;
Truly I hold it scarce worth a thought.
You have killed all that I hold most dear;
Of my fairest hopes I follow the bier.
Farewell, then, Dame Margit!


MARGIT.

          Nay, Gudmund, hear!
By all that is holy--!


GUDMUND.

          Live on as before
Live on in honour and joyance--
Never shall Gudmund darken your door,
Never shall cause you 'noyance.


MARGIT.

Enough, enough.  Your bitterness
You presently shall rue.
Had I known you outlawed, shelterless,
Hunted the country through--
Trust me, the day that brought you here
Would have seemed the fairest of many a year;
And a feast I had counted it indeed
When you turned to Solhoug for refuge in need.


GUDMUND.

What say you--?  How shall I read your mind?


MARGIT. [Holding out her hand to him.]

Read this: that at Solhoug dwell kinsfolk kind.


GUDMUND.

But you said of late--?


MARGIT.

                       To that pay no heed,
Or hear me, and understand indeed.
For me is life but a long, black night,
Nor sun, nor star for me shines bright.
I have sold my youth and my liberty,
And none from my bargain can set me free.
My heart's content I have bartered for gold,
With gilded chains I have fettered myself;
Trust me, it is but comfort cold
To the sorrowful soul, the pride of pelf.
How blithe was my childhood--how free from care!
Our house was lowly and scant our store;
But treasures of hope in my breast I bore.


GUDMUND. [Whose eyes have been fixed upon her.]

E'en then you were growing to beauty rare.


MARGIT.

Mayhap; but the praises showered on me
Caused the wreck of my happiness--that I now see.
To far-off lands away you sailed;
But deep in my heart was graven each song
You had ever sung; and their glamour was strong;
With a mist of dreams my brow they veiled.
In them all the joys you had dwelt upon
That can find a home in the beating breast;
You had sung so oft of the lordly life
'Mid knights and ladies.  And lo! anon
Came wooers a many from east and from west;
And so--I became Bengt Gauteson's wife.


GUDMUND.

Oh, Margit!


MARGIT.

            The days that passed were but few
Ere with tears my folly I 'gan to rue.
To think, my kinsman and friend, on thee
Was all the comfort left to me.
How empty now seemed Solhoug's hall,
How hateful and drear its great rooms all!
Hither came many a knight and dame,
Came many a skald to sing my fame.
But never a one who could fathom aright
My spirit and all its yearning--
I shivered, as though in the Hill-King's might;
Yet my head throbbed, my blood was burning.


GUDMUND.

But your husband--?


MARGIT.

                    He never to me was dear.
'Twas his gold was my undoing.
When he spoke to me, aye, or e'en drew near,
My spirit writhed with ruing.
     [Clasping her hands.

And thus have I lived for three long years--
A life of sorrow, of unstanched tears!
Your coming was rumoured.  You know full well
What pride deep down in my heart doth dwell.
I hid my anguish, I veiled my woe,
For you were the last that the truth must know.


GUDMUND. [Moved.]

'Twas therefore, then, that you turned away--


MARGIT. [Not looking at him.]

I thought you came at my woe to jeer.


GUDMUND.

Margit, how could you think--?


MARGIT.

                               Nay, nay,
There was reason enough for such a fear.
But thanks be to Heaven that fear is gone;
And now no longer I stand alone;
My spirit now is as light and free
As a child's at play 'neath the greenwood tree.
     [With a sudden start of fear.

Ah, where are my wits fled!  How could I forget--?
Ye saints, I need sorely your succor yet!
An outlaw, you said--?


GUDMUND. [Smiling.]

                      Nay, now I'm at home;
Hither the King's men scarce dare come.


MARGIT.

Your fall has been sudden.  I pray you, tell
How you lost the King's favour.


GUDMUND.

                         'Twas thus it befell.
You know how I journeyed to France of late,
When the Chancellor, Audun of Hegranes,
Fared thither from Bergen, in royal state,
To lead home the King's bride, the fair Princess,
With her squires, and maidens, and ducats bright.
Sir Audun's a fair and stately knight,
The Princess shone with a beauty rare--
Her eyes seemed full of a burning prayer.
They would oft talk alone and in whispers, the two--
Of what?  That nobody guessed or knew.
There came a night when I leant at ease
Against the galley's railing;
My thought flew onward to Norway's leas,
With the milk-white seagulls sailing.
Two voices whispered behind my back;--
I turned--it was he and she;
I knew them well, though the night was black,
But they--they saw not me.
She gazed upon him with sorrowful eyes
And whispered: "Ah, if to southern skies
We could turn the vessel's prow,
And we were alone in the bark, we twain,
My heart, methinks, would find peace again,
Nor would fever burn my brow."
Sir Audun answers; and straight she replies,
In words so fierce, so bold;
Like glittering stars I can see her eyes;
She begged him--
     [Breaking off.

                    My blood ran cold.


MARGIT.

She begged--?


GUDMUND.

I arose, and they vanished apace;
All was silent, fore and aft:--
     [Producing a small phial.

But this I found by their resting place.


MARGIT.

And that--?


GUDMUND. [Lowering his voice.]

             Holds a secret draught.
A drop of this in your enemy's cup
And his life will sicken and wither up.
No leechcraft helps 'gainst the deadly thing.


MARGIT.

And that--?


GUDMUND.

        That draught was meant for the King.


MARGIT.

Great God!


GUDMUND. [Putting up the phial again.]

         That I found it was well for them all.
In three days more was our voyage ended;
Then I fled, by my faithful men attended.
For I knew right well, in the royal hall,
That Audun subtly would work my fall,--
Accusing me--


MARGIT.

              Aye, but at Solhoug he
Cannot harm you.  All as of old will be.


GUDMUND.

All?  Nay, Margit--you then were free.


MARGIT.

You mean--?


GUDMUND.

       I?  Nay, I meant naught.  My brain
Is wildered; but ah, I am blithe and fain
To be, as of old, with you sisters twain.
But tell me,--Signe--?


MARGIT. [Points smiling towards the door on the left.]

                       She comes anon.
To greet her kinsman she needs must don
Her trinkets--a task that takes time, 'tis plain.


GUDMUND.

I must see--I must see if she knows me again.

     [He goes out to the left.


MARGIT.

  [Following him with her eyes.]  How fair and manlike he is!  [With
a sigh.]  There is little likeness 'twixt him and--  [Begins putting
things in order on the table, but presently stops.]  "You then were
free," he said.  Yes, then!  [A short pause.]  'Twas a strange tale,
that of the Princess who--  She held another dear, and then--  Aye,
those women of far-off lands--  I have heard it before--they are
not weak as we are; they do not fear to pass from thought to deed.
[Takes up a goblet which stands on the table.]  'Twas in this
beaker that Gudmund and I, when he went away, drank to his happy
return.  'Tis well-nigh the only heirloom I brought with me to
Solhoug.  [Putting the goblet away in a cupboard.]  How soft is
this summer day; and how light it is in here!  So sweetly has the
sun not shone for three long years.

     [SIGNE, and after her GUDMUND, enters from the left.


SIGNE. [Runs laughing up to MARGIT.]

Ha, ha, ha!  He will not believe that 'tis I!


MARGIT. [Smiling to GUDMUND.]

You see: while in far-off lands you strayed,
She, too, has altered, the little maid.


GUDMUND.

Aye truly!  But that she should be--  Why,
'Tis a marvel in very deed.
     [Takes both SIGNE's hands and looks at her.

Yet, when I look in these eyes so blue,
The innocent child-mind I still can read--
Yes, Signe, I know that 'tis you!
I needs must laugh when I think how oft
I have thought of you perched on my shoulder aloft
As you used to ride.  You were then a child;
Now you are a nixie, spell-weaving, wild.


SIGNE. [Threatening with her finger.]

Beware!  If the nixie's ire you awaken,
Soon in her nets you will find yourself taken.


GUDMUND. [To himself.]

I am snared already, it seems to me.


SIGNE.

But, Gudmund, wait--you have still to see
How I've shielded your harp from the dust and the rust.
      [As she goes out to the left.

You shall teach me all of your songs!  You must!


GUDMUND. [Softly, as he follows her with his eyes.]

She has flushed to the loveliest rose of May,
That was yet but a bud in the morning's ray.


SIGNE. [Returning with the harp.]

Behold!


GUDMUND. [Taking it.]

         My harp!  As bright as of yore!
     [Striking one or two chords.

Still the old chords ring sweet and clear--
On the wall, untouched, thou shalt hang no more.


MARGIT. [Looking out at the back.]

Our guests are coming.


SIGNE. [While GUDMUND preludes his song.]

              Hush--hush!  Oh, hear!


GUDMUND. [Sings.]

I roamed through the uplands so heavy of cheer;
The little birds quavered in bush and in brere;
The little birds quavered, around and above:
Wouldst know of the sowing and growing of love?

It grows like the oak tree through slow-rolling years;
'Tis nourished by dreams, and by songs, and by tears;
But swiftly 'tis sown; ere a moment speeds by,
Deep, deep in the heart love is rooted for aye.

     [As he strikes the concluding chords, he goes towards the
       back where he lays down his harp.


SIGNE. [Thoughtfully, repeats to herself.]

But swiftly 'tis sown; ere a moment speeds by,
Deep, deep in the heart love is rooted for aye.


MARGIT.

  [Absently.]  Did you speak to me?--I heard not clearly--?


SIGNE.

  I?  No, no.  I only meant--

     [She again becomes absorbed in dreams.


MARGIT. [Half aloud; looking straight before her.]

It grows like the oak tree through slow-rolling years;
'Tis nourished by dreams, and by songs and by tears.


SIGNE.

  [Returning to herself.]  You said that--?


MARGIT.

  [Drawing her hand over her brow.]  Nay, 'twas nothing.  Come, we
must go meet our guests.

     [BENGT enters with many GUESTS, both men and women,
       through the passageway.


GUESTS.

    With song and harping enter we
        The feast-hall opened wide;
    Peace to our hostess kind and free,
        All happiness to her betide.
    O'er Solhoug's roof for ever may
        Bright as to-day
        The heavens abide.




ACT SECOND


A birch grove adjoining the house, one corner of which is seen to
     the left.  At the back, a footpath leads up the hillside.  To
     the right of the footpath a river comes tumbling down a ravine
     and loses itself among boulders and stones.  It is a light
     summer evening.  The door leading to the house stands open;
     the windows are lighted up.  Music is heard from within.



THE GUESTS. [Singing in the Feast Hall.]

Set bow to fiddle!  To sound of strings
We'll dance till night shall furl her wings,
  Through the long hours glad and golden!
Like blood-red blossom the maiden glows--
Come, bold young wooer and hold the rose
  In a soft embrace enfolden.

     [KNUT GESLING and ERIK OF HEGGE enter from the house.  Sounds
       of music, dancing and merriment are heard from
       within during what follows.


ERIK.

  If only you come not to repent it, Knut.


KNUT.

  That is my affair.


ERIK.

  Well, say what you will, 'tis a daring move.  You are the King's
Sheriff.  Commands go forth to you that you shall seize the person
of Gudmund Alfson, wherever you may find him.  And now, when you
have him in your grasp, you proffer him your friendship, and let
him go freely, whithersoever he will.


KNUT.

  I know what I am doing.  I sought him in his own dwelling, but
there he was not to be found.  If, now, I went about to seize him
here--think you that Dame Margit would be minded to give me Signe
to wife?


ERIK.

  [With deliberation.]  No, by fair means it might scarcely be, but--


KNUT.

  And by foul means I am loth to proceed.  Moreover, Gudmund is
my friend from bygone days; and he can be helpful to me.  [With
decision.]  Therefore it shall be as I have said.  This evening
no one at Solhoug shall know that Gudmund Alfson is an outlaw;--
to-morrow he must look to himself.


ERIK.

  Aye, but the King's decree?


KNUT.

  Oh, the King's decree!  You know as well as I that the King's
decree is but little heeded here in the uplands.  Were the King's
decree to be enforced, many a stout fellow among us would have
to pay dear both for bride-rape and for man-slaying.  Come this
way, I would fain know where Signe--?

     [They go out to the right.
     [GUDMUND and SIGNE come down the footpath at the back.


SIGNE.

Oh, speak!  Say on!  For sweeter far
Such words than sweetest music are.


GUDMUND.

Signe, my flower, my lily fair!


SIGNE. [In subdued, but happy wonderment.]

I am dear to him--I!


Gudmund.

                    As none other I swear.

SIGNE.

And is it I that can bind your will!
And is it I that your heart can fill!
Oh, dare I believe you?


GUDMUND.

                       Indeed you may.
List to me, Signe!  The years sped away,
But faithful was I in my thoughts to you,
My fairest flowers, ye sisters two.
My own heart I could not clearly read.
When I left, my Signe was but a child,
A fairy elf, like the creatures wild
Who play, while we sleep, in wood and mead.
But in Solhoug's hall to-day, right loud
My heart spake, and right clearly;
It told me that Margit's a lady proud,
Whilst you're the sweet maiden I love most dearly.


SIGNE. [Who has only half listened to his words.]

I mind me, we sat in the hearth's red glow,
One winter evening--'tis long ago--
And you sang to me of the maiden fair
Whom the neckan had lured to his watery lair.
There she forgot both father and mother,
There she forgot both sister and brother;
Heaven and earth and her Christian speech,
And her God, she forgot them all and each.
But close by the strand a stripling stood
And he was heartsore and heavy of mood.
He struck from his harpstrings notes of woe,
That wide o'er the waters rang loud, rang low.
The spell-bound maid in the tarn so deep,
His strains awoke from her heavy sleep,
The neckan must grant her release from his rule,
She rose through the lilies afloat on the pool--
Then looked she to heaven while on green earth she trod,
And wakened once more to her faith and her God.


GUDMUND.

Signe, my fairest of flowers!


SIGNE.

                              It seems
That I, too, have lived in a world of dreams.
But the strange deep words you to-night have spoken,
Of the power of love, have my slumber broken.
The heavens seemed never so blue to me,
Never the world so fair;
I can understand, as I roam with thee,
The song of the birds in air.


GUDMUND.

So mighty is love--it stirs in the breast
Thought and longings and happy unrest.
But come, let us both to your sister go.


SIGNE.

Would you tell her--?


GUDMUND.

                   Everything she must know.


SIGNE.

Then go you alone;--I feel that my cheek
Would be hot with blushes to hear you speak.


GUDMUND.

So be it, I go.


SIGNE.

              And here will I bide;
     [Listening towards the right.

Or better--down by the riverside,
I hear Knut Gesling, with maidens and men.


GUDMUND.

There will you stay?


SIGNE.

                    Till you come again

     [She goes out to the right.  GUDMUND goes into the house.
     [MARGIT enters from behind the house on the left.


MARGIT.

In the hall there is gladness and revelry;
The dancers foot it with jest and glee.
The air weighed hot on my brow and breast;
For Gudmund, he was not there.
     [She draws a deep breath.

Out here 'tis better: here's quiet and rest.
How sweet is the cool night air!
     [A brooding silence.

The horrible thought!  Oh, why should it be
That wherever I go it follows me?
The phial--doth a secret contain;
A drop of this in my--enemy's cup,
And his life would sicken and wither up;
The leech's skill would be tried in vain.
     [Again a silence.

Were I sure that Gudmund--held me dear--
Then little I'd care for--

     [GUDMUND enters from the house.


GUDMUND.

                          You, Margit, here?
And alone?  I have sought you everywhere.


MARGIT.

'Tis cool here.  I sickened of heat and glare.
See you how yonder the white mists glide
Softly over the marshes wide?
Here it is neither dark nor light,
But midway between them--
     [To herself.

                       --as in my breast.
     [Looking at him.

Is't not so--when you wander on such a night
You hear, though but half to yourself confessed,
A stirring of secret life through the hush,
In tree and in leaf, in flower and in rush?
     [With a sudden change of tone.

Can you guess what I wish?


GUDMUND.

                              Well?


MARGIT.

                                That I could be
The nixie that haunts yonder upland lea.
How cunningly I should weave my spell!
Trust me--!


GUDMUND.

           Margit, what ails you?  Tell!


MARGIT. [Paying no heed to him.]

How I should quaver my magic lay!
Quaver and croon it both night and day!
     [With growing vehemence.

How I would lure the knight so bold
Through the greenwood glades to my mountain hold.
There were the world and its woes forgot
In the burning joys of our blissful lot.


GUDMUND.

Margit!  Margit!


MARGIT. [Ever more wildly.]

            At midnight's hour
Sweet were our sleep in my lonely bower;--
And if death should come with the dawn, I trow
'Twere sweet to die so;--what thinkest thou?


GUDMUND.

You are sick!


MARGIT. [Bursting into laughter.]

      Ha, ha!--Let me laugh!  'Tis good
To laugh when the heart is in laughing mood!


GUDMUND.

I see that you still have the same wild soul
As of old--


MARGIT. [With sudden seriousness.]

       Nay, let not that vex your mind,
'Tis only at midnight it mocks control;
By day I am timid as any hind.
How tame I have grown, you yourself must say,
When you think on the women in lands far away--
Of that fair Princess--ah, she was wild!
Beside her lamblike am I and mild.
She did not helplessly yearn and brood,
She would have acted; and that--


GUDMUND.

                                  'Tis good
You remind me; Straightway I'll cast away
What to me is valueless after this day--

     [Takes out the phial.


MARGIT.

The phial!  You meant--?


GUDMUND.

                          I thought it might be
At need a friend that should set me free
Should the King's men chance to lay hands on me.
But from to-night it has lost its worth;
Now will I fight all the kings of earth,
Gather my kinsfolk and friends to the strife,
And battle right stoutly for freedom and life.

     [Is about to throw the phial against a rock.


MARGIT. [Seizing his arm.]

Nay, hold!  Let me have it--


GUDMUND.

                            First tell me why?


MARGIT.

I'd fain fling it down to the neckan hard by,
Who so often has made my dull hours fleet
With his harping and songs, so strange and sweet.
Give it me!
     [Takes the phial from his hand.

           There!

     [Feigns to throw it into the river.


GUDMUND. [Goes to the right, and looks down into the ravine.]

                 Have you thrown it away?


MARGIT. [Concealing the phial.]

Aye, surely!  You saw--
     [Whispers as she goes towards the house.

                 Now God help and spare me!
     [Aloud.

Gudmund!


GUDMUND. [Approaching.]

        What would you?


MARGIT.

                      Teach me, I pray,
How to interpret the ancient lay
They sing of the church in the valley there:
A gentle knight and a lady fair,
They loved each other well.
That very day on her bier she lay
He on his sword-point fell.
They buried her by the northward spire,
And him by the south kirk wall;
And theretofore grew neither bush nor briar
In the hallowed ground at all.
But next spring from their coffins twain
Two lilies fair upgrew--
And by and by, o'er the roof-tree high,
They twined and they bloomed the whole year through.
How read you the riddle?


GUDMUND. [Looks searchingly at her.]

                         I scarce can say.


MARGIT.

You may doubtless read it in many a way;
But its truest meaning, methinks, is clear:
The church can never sever two that hold each other dear.


GUDMUND. [To himself.]

Ye saints, if she should--?  Lest worse befall,
'Tis time indeed I told her all!
     [Aloud.

Do you wish for my happiness--Margit, tell!


MARGIT. [In joyful agitation.]

Wish for it!  I!


GUDMUND.

                Then, wot you well,
The joy of my life now rests with you--


MARGIT. [With an outburst.]

Gudmund!


GUDMUND.

        Listen! 'tis the time you knew--

     [He stops suddenly.
     [Voices and laughter are heard by the river bank.  SIGNE and
       other GIRLS enter from the right, accompanied by KNUT,
       ERIK, and several YOUNGER MEN.


KNUT.

  [Still at a distance.]  Gudmund Alfson!  Wait; I must speak a word
with you.

     [He stops, talking to ERIK.  The other GUESTS in the meantime
       enter the house.


MARGIT.

  [To herself.]  The joy of his life--!  What else can he mean
  but--!  [Half aloud.]  Signe--my dear, dear sister!

     [She puts her arm round SIGNE's waist, and they go towards
       the back talking to each other.


GUDMUND.

  [Softly as he follows them with his eyes.]  Aye, so it were wisest.
Both Signe and I must away from Solhoug.  Knut Gesling has shown
himself my friend; he will help me.


KNUT.

  [Softly, to ERIK.]  Yes, yes, I say, Gudmund is her kinsman; he
can best plead my cause.


ERIK.

  Well, as you will.

     [He goes into the house.


KNUT.

  [Approaching.]  Listen, Gudmund--


GUDMUND.

  [Smiling.]  Come you to tell me that you dare no longer let me
go free.


KNUT.

  Dare!  Be at your ease as to that.  Knut Gesling dares whatever
he will.  No, 'tis another matter.  You know that here in the
district, I am held to be a wild, unruly companion--


GUDMUND.

  Aye, and if rumour lies not--


KNUT.

  Why no, much that it reports may be true enough.  But now, I must
tell you--

     [They go, conversing, up towards the back.


SIGNE.

  [To MARGIT, as they come forward beside the house.]  I understand
you not.  You speak as though an unlooked-for happiness had befallen
you.  What is in your mind?


MARGIT.

  Signe--you are still a child; you know not what it means to have
ever in your heart the dread of--  [Suddenly breaking off.]  Think,
Signe, what it must be to wither and die without ever having lived.


SIGNE.

  [Looks at her in astonishment, and shakes her head.]  Nay, but,
Margit--?


MARGIT.

  Aye, aye, you do not understand, but none the less--

     [They go up again, talking to each other.  GUDMUND and KNUT
       come down on the other side.


GUDMUND.

  Well, if so it be--if this wild life no longer contents you--
then I will give you the best counsel that ever friend gave to
friend: take to wife an honourable maiden.


KNUT.

  Say you so?  And if I now told you that 'tis even that I have
in mind?


GUDMUND.

  Good luck and happiness to you then, Knut Gesling!  And now you
must know that I too--


KNUT.

  You?  Are you, too, so purposed?


GUDMUND.

  Aye truly.  But the King's wrath--I am a banished man--


KNUT.

  Nay, to that you need give but little thought.  As yet there is
no one here, save Dame Margit, that knows aught of the matter;
and so long as I am your friend, you have one in whom you can
trust securely.  Now I must tell you--

     [He proceeds in a whisper as they go up again.


SIGNE.

  [As she and MARGIT again advance.]  But tell me then Margit--!


MARGIT.

  More I dare not tell you.


SIGNE.

  Then will I be more open-hearted than you.  But first answer me
one question.  [Bashfully, with hesitation.]  Is there no one who
has told you anything concerning me?


MARGIT.

  Concerning you?  Nay, what should that be?


SIGNE.

  [As before, looking downwards.]  You said to me this morning: if
a wooer came riding hither--?


MARGIT.

  That is true.  [To herself.]  Knut Gesling--has he already--?
[Eagerly to SIGNE.]  Well?  What then?


SIGNE.

  [Softly, but with exultation.]  The wooer has come!  He has come,
Margit!  I knew not then whom you meant; but now--!


MARGIT.

  And what have you answered him?


SIGNE.

  Oh, how should I know?  [Flinging her arms round her sister's
neck.]  But the world seems to me so rich and beautiful since the
moment when he told me that he held me dear.


MARGIT.

  Why, Signe, Signe, I cannot understand that you should so quickly--!
You scarce knew him before to-day.


SIGNE.

  Oh, 'tis but little I yet know of love; but this I know that what
the song says is true:
Full swiftly 'tis sown; ere a moment speeds by,
Deep, deep in the heart love is rooted for aye--


MARGIT.

  So be it; and since so it is, I need no longer hold aught concealed
from you.  Ah--

     [She stops suddenly, as she sees KNUT and GUDMUND approaching.


KNUT.

  [In a tone of satisfaction.]  Ha, this is as I would have it,
Gudmund.  Here is my hand!


MARGIT.

  [To herself.]  What is this?


GUDMUND.

  [To KNUT.]  And here is mine!

     [They shake hands.


KNUT.

  But now we must each of us name who it is--


GUDMUND.

  Good.  Here at Solhoug, among so many fair women, I have found
her whom--


KNUT.

  I too.  And I will bear her home this very night, if it be needful.


MARGIT.

  [Who has approached unobserved.]  All saints in heaven!


GUDMUND.

  [Nods to KNUT.]  The same is my intent.


SIGNE.

  [Who has also been listening.]  Gudmund!


GUDMUND AND KNUT.

  [Whispering to each other, as they both point at Signe.]  There
she is!


GUDMUND.

  [Starting.]  Aye, mine.


KNUT.

  [Likewise.]  No, mine!


MARGIT.

  [Softly, half bewildered.]  Signe!


GUDMUND.

  [As before, to KNUT.]  What mean you by that?


KNUT.

  I mean that 'tis Signe whom I--


GUDMUND.

  Signe!  Signe is my betrothed in the sight of God.


MARGIT.

  [With a cry.]  It was she!  No--no!


GUDMUND.

  [To himself, as he catches sight of her.]  Margit!  She has
heard everything.


KNUT.

  Ho, ho!  So this is how it stands?  Nay, Dame Margit, 'tis needless
to put on such an air of wonder; now I understand everything.


MARGIT.

  [To SIGNE.]  But not a moment ago you said--?  [Suddenly grasping
the situation.]  'Twas Gudmund you meant!


SIGNE.

  [Astonished.]  Yes, did you not know it!  But what ails
you, Margit?


MARGIT.

  [In an almost toneless voice.]  Nay, nothing, nothing.


KNUT.

  [To MARGIT.]  And this morning, when you made me give my word
that I would stir no strife here to-night--you already knew that
Gudmund Alfson was coming.  Ha, ha, think not that you can hoodwink
Knut Gesling!  Signe has become dear to me.  Even this morning
'twas but my hasty vow that drove me to seek her hand; but now--


SIGNE.

  [To MARGIT.]  He?  Was this the wooer that was in your mind?


MARGIT.

  Hush, hush!


KNUT.

  [Firmly and harshly.]  Dame Margit--you are her elder sister; you
shall give me an answer.


MARGIT.

  [Battling with herself.]  Signe has already made her choice;--I
have naught to answer.


KNUT.

  Good; then I have nothing more to do at Solhoug.  But after
midnight--mark you this--the day is at an end; then you may chance
to see me again, and then Fortune must decide whether it be Gudmund
or I that shall bear Signe away from this house.


GUDMUND.

  Aye, try if you dare; it shall cost you a bloody sconce.


SIGNE.

  [In terror.]  Gudmund!  By all the saints--!


KNUT.

  Gently, gently, Gudmund Alfson!  Ere sunrise you shall be in my
power.  And she--your lady-love--  [Goes up to the door, beckons
and calls in a low voice.]  Erik! Erik!  come hither! we must away
to our kinsfolk.  [Threateningly, while ERIK shows himself in the
doorway.]  Woe upon you all when I come again!

     [He and ERIK go off to the left at the back.


SIGNE.

  [Softly to GUDMUND.]  Oh, tell me, what does all this mean?


GUDMUND.

  [Whispering.]  We must both leave Solhoug this very night.


SIGNE.

  God shield me--you would--!


GUDMUND.

  Say nought of it!  No word to any one, not even to your sister.


MARGIT.

  [To herself.]  She--it is she!  She of whom he had scarce thought
before to-night.  Had I been free, I know well whom he had chosen.--
Aye, free!

     [BENGT and GUESTS, both Men and Women enter from the house.


YOUNG MEN AND MAIDENS.

Out here, out here be the feast arrayed,
While the birds are asleep in the greenwood shade,
How sweet to sport in the flowery glade
      'Neath the birches.

Out here, out here, shall be mirth and jest,
No sigh on the lips and no care in the breast,
When the fiddle is tuned at the dancers' 'hest,
      'Neath the birches.


BENGT.

  That is well, that is well!  So I fain would see it!  I am merry,
and my wife likewise; and therefore I pray ye all to be merry
along with us.


ONE OF THE GUESTS.

  Aye, now let us have a stave-match.*

     *A contest in impromptu verse-making.


MANY.

  [Shout.]  Yes, yes, a stave-match!


ANOTHER GUEST.

  Nay, let that be; it leads but to strife at the feast.  [Lowering
his voice.]  Bear in mind that Knut Gesling is with us to-night.


SEVERAL.

  [Whispering among themselves.]  Aye, aye, that is true.  Remember
the last time, how he--.  Best beware.


AN OLD MAN.

  But you, Dame Margit--I know your kind had ever wealth of tales in
store; and you yourself, even as a child, knew many a fair legend.


MARGIT.

  Alas! I have forgot them all.  But ask Gudmund Alfson, my kinsman;
he knows a tale that is merry enough.


GUDMUND.

  [In a low voice, imploringly.]  Margit!


MARGIT.

  Why, what a pitiful countenance you put on!  Be merry, Gudmund!
Be merry!  Aye, aye, it comes easy to you, well I wot.  [Laughing,
to the GUESTS.]  He has seen the huldra to-night.  She would fain
have tempted him;  but Gudmund is a faithful swain.  [Turns again
to GUDMUND.]  Aye, but the tale is not finished yet.  When you
bear away your lady-love, over hill and through forest, be sure
you turn not round; be sure you never look back--the huldra sits
laughing behind every bush; and when all is done--  [In a low
voice, coming close up to him.]  --you will go no further than
she will let you.

     [She crosses to the right.


SIGNE.

  Oh, God!  Oh, God!


BENGT.

  [Going around among the GUESTS in high contentment.]  Ha, ha, ha!
Dame Margit knows how to set the mirth afoot!  When she takes it
in hand, she does it much better than I.


GUDMUND.

  [To himself.]  She threatens!  I must tear the last hope out of
her breast; else will peace never come to her mind.  [Turns to the
GUESTS.]  I mind me of a little song.  If it please you to hear it--


SEVERAL OF THE GUESTS.

  Thanks, thanks, Gudmund Alfson!

     [They close around him some sitting, others standing.  MARGIT
       leans against a tree in front on the right.  SIGNE stands
       on the left, near the house.


GUDMUND.

  I rode into the wildwood,
     I sailed across the sea,
  But 'twas at home I wooed and won
     A maiden fair and free.

  It was the Queen of Elfland,
     She waxed full wroth and grim:
  Never, she swore, shall that maiden fair
     Ride to the church with him.

  Hear me, thou Queen of Elfland,
     Vain, vain are threat and spell;
  For naught can sunder two true hearts
     That love each other well!


AN OLD MAN.

  That is a right fair song.  See how the young swains cast their
glances thitherward!  [Pointing towards the GIRLS.]  Aye, aye,
doubtless each has his own.


BENGT.

  [Making eyes at MARGIT.]  Yes, I have mine, that is sure enough.
Ha, ha, ha!


MARGIT.

  [To herself, quivering.]  To have to suffer all this shame and
scorn!  No, no; now to essay the last remedy.


BENGT.

  What ails you?  Meseems you look so pale.


MARGIT.

  'Twill soon pass over.  [Turns to the GUESTS.]  Did I say e'en
now that I had forgotten all my tales?  I bethink me now that I
remember one.


BENGT.

  Good, good, my wife!  Come, let us hear it.


YOUNG GIRLS.

  [Urgently.]  Yes, tell it us, tell it us, Dame Margit!


MARGIT.

  I almost fear that 'twill little please you; but that must be as
it may.


GUDMUND.

  [To himself.]  Saints in heaven, surely she would not--!


MARGIT.

It was a fair and noble maid,
She dwelt in her father's hall;
Both linen and silk did she broider and braid,
Yet found in it solace small.
For she sat there alone in cheerless state,
Empty were hall and bower;
In the pride of her heart, she was fain to mate
With a chieftain of pelf and power.
But now 'twas the Hill King, he rode from the north,
With his henchmen and his gold;
On the third day at night he in triumph fared forth,
Bearing her to his mountain hold.
Full many a summer she dwelt in the hill;
Out of beakers of gold she could drink at her will.
Oh, fair are the flowers of the valley, I trow,
But only in dreams can she gather them now!
'Twas a youth, right gentle and bold to boot,
Struck his harp with such magic might
That it rang to the mountain's inmost root,
Where she languished in the night.
The sound in her soul waked a wondrous mood--
Wide open the mountain-gates seemed to stand;
The peace of God lay over the land,
And she saw how it all was fair and good.
There happened what never had happened before;
She had wakened to life as his harp-strings thrilled;
And her eyes were opened to all the store
Of treasure wherewith the good earth is filled.
For mark this well: it hath ever been found
That those who in caverns deep lie bound
Are lightly freed by the harp's glad sound.
He saw her prisoned, he heard her wail--
But he cast unheeding his harp aside,
Hoisted straightway his silken sail,
And sped away o'er the waters wide
To stranger strands with his new-found bride.
     [With ever-increasing passion.

So fair was thy touch on the golden strings
That my breast heaves high and my spirit sings!
I must out, I must out to the sweet green leas!
I die in the Hill-King's fastnesses!
He mocks at my woe as he clasps his bride
And sails away o'er the waters wide.
     [Shrieks.

With me all is over; my hill-prison barred;
Unsunned is the day, and the night all unstarred.

     [She totters and, fainting, seeks to support herself against
       the trunk of a tree.


SIGNE.

  [Weeping, has rushed up to her, and takes her in her arms.]
Margit! My sister!


GUDMUND.

  [At the same time, supporting her.]  Help! help! she is dying!

     [BENGT and the GUESTS flock round them with cries of alarm.




ACT THIRD


The hall at Solhoug as before, but now in disorder after the feast.
    It is night still, but with a glimmer of approaching dawn in
    the room and over the landscape without.

BENGT stands outside in the passage-way, with a beaker of ale in
    his hand.  A party of GUESTS are in the act of leaving the
    house.  In the room a MAID-SERVANT is restoring order.


BENGT.

  [Calls to the departing GUESTS.]  God speed you, then, and bring
you back ere long to Solhoug.  Methinks you, like the rest, might
have stayed and slept till morning.  Well, well!  Yet hold--I'll
e'en go with you to the gate.  I must drink your healths once more.

     [He goes out.


GUESTS. [Sing in the distance.]

Farewell, and God's blessing on one and all
  Beneath this roof abiding!
The road must be faced.  To the fiddler we call:
  Tune up!  Our cares deriding,
    With dance and with song
We'll shorten the way so weary and long.
    Right merrily off we go.

     [The song dies away in the distance.
     [MARGIT enters the hall by the door on the right.


MAID.

God save us, my lady, have you left your bed?


MARGIT.

  I am well.  Go you and sleep.  Stay--tell me, are the guests
all gone?


MAID.

  No, not all; some wait till later in the day; ere now they are
sleeping sound.


MARGIT.

  And Gudmund Alfson--?


MAID.

  He, too, is doubtless asleep.  [Points to the right.]  'Tis some
time since he went to his chamber--yonder, across the passage.


MARGIT.

  Good; you may go.

     [The MAID goes out to the left.
     [MARGIT walks slowly across the hall, seats herself by the
       table on the right, and gazes out at the open window.


MARGIT.

To-morrow, then, Gudmund will ride away
Out into the world so great and wide.
Alone with my husband here I must stay;
And well do I know what will then betide.
Like the broken branch and the trampled flower
I shall suffer and fade from hour to hour.
     [Short pause; she leans back in her chair.

I once heard a tale of a child blind from birth,
Whose childhood was full of joy and mirth;
For the mother, with spells of magic might,
Wove for the dark eyes a world of light.
And the child looked forth with wonder and glee
Upon the valley and hill, upon land and sea.
Then suddenly the witchcraft failed--
The child once more was in darkness pent;
Good-bye to games and merriment;
With longing vain the red cheeks paled.
And its wail of woe, as it pined away,
Was ceaseless, and sadder than words can say.--
Oh! like the child's my eyes were sealed,
To the light and the life of summer blind--
     [She springs up.

But now--!  And I in this cage confined!
No, now is the worth of my youth revealed!
Three years of life I on him have spent--
My husband--but were I longer content
This hapless, hopeless weird to dree,
Meek as a dove I needs must be.
I am wearied to death of petty brawls;
The stirring life of the great world calls.
I will follow Gudmund with shield and bow,
I will share his joys, I will soothe his woe,
Watch o'er him both by night and day.
All that behold shall envy the life
Of the valiant knight and Margit his wife.--
His wife!
     [Wrings her hands.

         Oh God, what is this I say!
Forgive me, forgive me, and oh! let me feel
The peace that hath power both to soothe and to heal.
     [Walks back and forward, brooding silently.

Signe, my sister--?  How hateful 'twere
To steal her glad young life from her!
But who can tell?  In very sooth
She may love him but with the light love of youth.
     [Again silence; she takes out the little phial, looks long
       at it and says under her breath:

This phial--were I its powers to try--
My husband would sleep for ever and aye!
     [Horror-struck.

No, no!  To the river's depths with it straight!
     [In the act of throwing it out of the window, stops.

And yet I could--'tis not yet too late.--
     [With an expression of mingled horror and rapture, whispers.

With what a magic resistless might
Sin masters us in our own despite!
Doubly alluring methinks is the goal
I must reach through blood, with the wreck of my soul.

     [BENGT, with the empty beaker in his hand, comes in from
       the passageway; his face is red; he staggers slightly.


BENGT.

  [Flinging the beaker upon the table on the left.]  My faith,
this has been a feast that will be the talk of the country.  [Sees
MARGIT.]  Eh, are you there?  You are well again.  Good, good.


MARGIT.

  [Who in the meantime has concealed the phial.]  Is the door
barred?


BENGT.

  [Seating himself at the table on the left.]  I have seen to
everything.  I went with the last guests as far as the gates.  But
what became of Knut Gesling to-night?--Give me mead, Margit!  I
am thirsty  Fill this cup.

     [MARGIT fetches a flagon of the mead from a cupboard, and
       and fills the goblet which is on the table before him.


MARGIT.

  [Crossing to the right with the flagon.]  You asked about
Knut Gesling.


BENGT.

  That I did.  The boaster, the braggart!  I have not forgot his
threats of yester-morning.


MARGIT.

  He used worse words when he left to-night.


BENGT.

  He did?  So much the better.  I will strike him dead.


MARGIT.

  [Smiling contemptuously.]  H'm--


BENGT.

  I will kill him, I say!  I fear not to face ten such fellows as
he.  In the store-house hangs my grandfather's axe; its shaft is
inlaid with silver; with that axe in my hands, I tell you--!
[Thumps the table and drinks.]  To-morrow I shall arm myself, go
forth with all my men, and slay Knut Gesling.

     [Empties the beaker.


MARGIT.

  [To herself.]  Oh, to have to live with him!

     [Is in the act of leaving the room.


BENGT.

  Margit, come here!  Fill my cup again.  [She approaches; he
tries to draw her down on his knee.]  Ha, ha, ha!  You are right
fair, Margit!  I love thee well!


MARGIT.

  [Freeing herself.]  Let me go!

     [Crosses, with the goblet in her hand, to the left.


BENGT.

  You are not in the humour to-night.  Ha, ha, ha!  That means no
great matter, I know.


MARGIT.

  [Softly, as she fills the goblet.]  Oh, that this might be the
last beaker I should fill for you.

     [She leaves the goblet on the table and is making her way
       out to the left.


BENGT.

  Hark to me, Margit.  For one thing you may thank Heaven, and
that is, that I made you my wife before Gudmund Alfson came back.


MARGIT.

  Why so?


BENGT.

  Why, say you?  Am not I ten times the richer man?  And certain
I am that he would have sought you for his wife, had you not been
the mistress of Solhoug.


MARGIT.

  [Drawing nearer and glancing at the goblet.]  Say you so?


BENGT.

  I could take my oath upon it.  Bengt Gauteson has two sharp eyes
in his head.  But he may still have Signe.


MARGIT.

  And you think he will--?


BENGT.

  Take her?  Aye, since he cannot have you.  But had you been
free,--then--  Ha, ha, ha!  Gudmund is like the rest.  He envies
me my wife.  That is why I set such store by you, Margit.  Here
with the goblet again.  And let it be full to the brim!


MARGIT.

  [Goes unwillingly across to the right.]  You shall have it
straightway.


BENGT.

  Knut Gesling is a suitor for Signe, too, but him I am resolved
to slay.  Gudmund is an honourable man; he shall have her.  Think,
Margit, what good days we shall have with them for neighbours.  We
will go a-visiting each other, and then will we sit the live-long
day, each with his wife on his knee, drinking and talking of this
and that.


MARGIT.

  [Whose mental struggle is visibly becoming more severe,
involuntarily takes out the phial as she says:]  No doubt no doubt!


BENGT.

  Ha, ha, ha! it may be that at first Gudmund will look askance
at me when I take you in my arms; but that, I doubt not, he will
soon get over.


MARGIT.

  This is more than woman can bear!  [Pours the contents of the
phial into the goblet, goes to the window and throws out the phial,
then says, without looking at him.]  Your beaker is full.


BENGT.

  Then bring it hither!


MARGIT.

  [Battling in an agony of indecision, at last says.]  I pray you
drink no more to-night!


BENGT.

  [Leans back in his chair and laughs.]  Oho!  You are impatient
for my coming?  Get you in; I will follow you soon.


MARGIT.

  [Suddenly decided.]  Your beaker is full.  [Points.]  There it is.

     [She goes quickly out to the left.


BENGT.

  [Rising.]  I like her well.  It repents me not a whit that I
took her to wife, though of heritage she owned no more than yonder
goblet and the brooches of her wedding gown.

     [He goes to the table at the window and takes the goblet.
     [A HOUSE-CARL enters hurriedly and with scared looks, from
       the back.


HOUSE-CARL.

  [Calls.]  Sir Bengt, Sir Bengt! haste forth with all the speed
you can!  Knut Gesling with an armed train is drawing near the house.


BENGT.

  [Putting down the goblet.]  Knut Gesling?  Who brings the tidings?


HOUSE-CARL.

  Some of your guests espied him on the road beneath, and hastened
back to warn you.


BENGT.

  E'en so.  Then will I--!  Fetch me my grandfather's battle-axe!

     [He and the HOUSE-CARL go out at the back.
     [Soon after, GUDMUND and SIGNE enter quietly and cautiously
       by the door at the back.


SIGNE. [In muffled tones.]

It must then, be so!


GUDMUND. [Also softly.]

                          Necessity's might
Constrains us.


SIGNE.

              Oh! thus under cover of night
To steal from the valley where I was born?
     [Dries her eyes.

Yet shalt thou hear no plaint forlorn.
'Tis for thy sake my home I flee;
Wert thou not outlawed, Gudmund dear,
I'd stay with my sister.


GUDMUND.

                      Only to be
Ta'en by Knut Gesling, with bow and spear,
Swung on the croup of his battle-horse,
And made his wife by force.


SIGNE.

Quick, let us flee.  But whither go?


GUDMUND.

Down by the fiord a friend I know;
He'll find us a ship.  O'er the salt sea foam
We'll sail away south to Denmark's bowers.
There waits you there a happy home;
Right joyously will fleet the hours;
The fairest of flowers they bloom in the shade
Of the beech-tree glade.


SIGNE. [Bursts into tears.]

Farewell, my poor sister!  Like my mother tender
Thou hast guarded the ways my feet have trod,
Hast guided my footsteps, aye praying to God,
The Almighty, to be my defender.--
Gudmund--here is a goblet filled with mead;
Let us drink to her; let us wish that ere long
Her soul may again be calm and strong,
And that God may be good to her need.

     [She takes the goblet into her hands.


GUDMUND.

Aye, let us drain it, naming her name!
     [Starts.

Stop!
     [Takes the goblet from her.

     For meseems it is the same--


SIGNE.

'Tis Margit's beaker.


GUDMUND. [Examining it carefully.]

          By Heaven, 'tis so!
I mind me still of the red wine's glow
As she drank from it on the day we parted
To our meeting again in health and glad-hearted.
To herself that draught betided woe.
No, Signe, ne'er drink wine or mead
From that goblet.
     [Pours its contents out at the window.

                   We must away with all speed.

     [Tumult and calls without, at the back.


SIGNE.

List, Gudmund!  Voices and trampling feet!


GUDMUND.

Knut Gesling's voice!


SIGNE.

                   O save us, Lord!


GUDMUND. [Places himself in front of her.]

Nay, nay, fear nothing, Signe sweet--
I am here, and my good sword.

     [MARGIT comes in in haste from the left.


MARGIT.

  [Listening to the noise.]  What means this?  Is my husband--?


GUDMUND AND SIGNE.

  Margit!


MARGIT.

  [Catches sight of them.]  Gudmund!  And Signe!  Are you here?


SIGNE.

  [Going towards her.]  Margit--dear sister!


MARGIT.

  [Appalled, having seen the goblet which GUDMUND still holds in
his hand.]  The goblet!  Who has drunk from it?


GUDMUND.

  [Confused.]  Drunk--?  I and Signe--we meant--


MARGIT.

  [Screams.]  O God, have mercy!  Help!  Help!  They will die!


GUDMUND.

  [Setting down the goblet.]  Margit--!


SIGNE.

  What ails you, sister?


MARGIT.

  [Towards the back.]  Help, help!  Will no one help?

     [A HOUSE-CARL rushes in from the passage-way.


HOUSE-CARL.

  [Calls in a terrified voice.]  Lady Margit!  Your husband--!


MARGIT.

  He--has he, too, drunk--!


GUDMUND.

  [To himself.]  Ah! now I understand--


HOUSE-CARL.

  Knut Gesling has slain him.


SIGNE.

  Slain!


GUDMUND.

  [Drawing his sword.]  Not yet, I hope.  [Whispers to MARGIT.]
Fear not.  No one has drunk from your goblet.


MARGIT.

  Then thanks be to God, who has saved us all!

     [She sinks down on a chair to the left.  Gudmund hastens
       towards the door at the back.


ANOTHER HOUSE-CARL.

  [Enters, stopping him.]  You come too late.  Sir Bengt is dead.


GUDMUND.

  Too late, then, too late.


HOUSE-CARL.

  The guests and your men have prevailed against the murderous
crew.  Knut Gesling and his men are prisoners.  Here they come.

     [GUDMUND's men, and a number of GUESTS and HOUSE-CARLS,
       lead in KNUT GESLING, ERIK OF HEGGE, and several of
       KNUT's men, bound.


KNUT.

   [Who is pale, says in a low voice.]  Man-slayer, Gudmund.  What
say you to that?


GUDMUND.

  Knut, Knut, what have you done?


ERIK.

  'Twas a mischance, of that I can take my oath.


KNUT.

  He ran at me swinging his axe; I meant but to defend myself,
and struck the death-blow unawares.


ERIK.

  Many here saw all that befell.


KNUT.

  Lady Margit, crave what fine you will.  I am ready to pay it.


MARGIT.

  I crave naught.  God will judge us all.  Yet stay--one thing I
require.  Forgo your evil design upon my sister.


KNUT.

  Never again shall I essay to redeem my baleful pledge.  From
this day onward I am a better man.  Yet would I fain escape
dishonourable punishment for my deed.  [To GUDMUND.]  Should you
be restored to favour and place again, say a good word for me to
the King!


GUDMUND.

  I?  Ere the sun sets, I must have left the country.

     [Astonishment amongst the GUESTS.  ERIK in whispers, explains
       the situation.


MARGIT.

  [To GUDMUND.]  You go?  And Signe with you?


SIGNE.

   [Beseechingly.]  Margit!


MARGIT.

  Good fortune follow you both!


SIGNE.

  [Flinging her arms round MARGIT's neck.]  Dear sister!


GUDMUND.

  Margit, I thank you.  And now farewell.  [Listening.]  Hush!
I hear the tramp of hoofs in the court-yard.


SIGNE.

  [Apprehensively.]  Strangers have arrived.

     [A HOUSE-CARL appears in the doorway at the back.


HOUSE-CARL.

  The King's men are without.  They seek Gudmund Alfson.


SIGNE.

  Oh God!


MARGIT.

  [In great alarm.]  The King's men!


GUDMUND.

  All is at an end, then.  Oh Signe, to lose you now--could there
be a harder fate?


KNUT.

  Nay, Gudmund; sell your life dearly, man!  Unbind us; we are
ready to fight for you, one and all.


ERIK.

  [Looks out.]  'Twould be in vain; they are too many for us.


SIGNE.

  Here they come.  Oh Gudmund, Gudmund!

     [The KING's MESSENGER enters from the back, with his escort.


MESSENGER.

  In the King's name I seek you, Gudmund Alfson, and bring you
his behests.


GUDMUND.

  Be it so.  Yet am I guiltless; I swear it by all that is holy!


MESSENGER.

  We know it.


GUDMUND.

  What say you?

     [Agitation amongst those present.


MESSENGER.

  I am ordered to bid you as a guest to the King's house.  His
friendship is yours as it was before, and along with it he bestows
on you rich fiefs.


GUDMUND.

  Signe!


SIGNE.

  Gudmund!


GUDMUND.

  But tell me--?


MESSENGER.

  Your enemy, the Chancellor Audun Hugleikson, has fallen.


GUDMUND.

  The Chancellor!


GUESTS.

  [To each other, in half-whisper.]  Fallen!


MESSENGER.

  Three days ago he was beheaded at Bergen.  [Lowering his voice.]
His offence was against Norway's Queen.


MARGIT. [Placing herself between GUDMUND and SIGNE.]

Thus punishment treads on the heels of crime!
Protecting angels, loving and bright,
Have looked down in mercy on me to-night,
And come to my rescue while yet it was time.
Now know I that life's most precious treasure
Is nor worldly wealth nor earthly pleasure,
I have felt the remorse, the terror I know,
Of those who wantonly peril their soul,
To St. Sunniva's cloister forthwith I go.--
     [Before GUDMUND and SIGNE can speak.

Nay: think not to move me or control.
     [Places SIGNE's hand in GUDMUND's.

Take her then Gudmund, and make her your bride.
Your union is holy; God's on your side.

     [Waving farewell, she goes towards the doorway on the left.
       GUDMUND and SIGNE follow her, she stops them with a
       motion of her hand, goes out, and shuts the door behind
       her.  At this moment the sun rises and sheds its light
       in the hall.


GUDMUND.

Signe--my wife!  See, the morning glow!
'Tis the morning of our young love.  Rejoice!


SIGNE.

All my fairest of dreams and of memories I owe
To the strains of thy harp and the sound of thy voice.
My noble minstrel, to joy or sadness
Tune thou that harp as seems thee best;
There are chords, believe me, within my breast
To answer to thine, or of woe or of gladness.


CHORUS OF MEN AND WOMEN.

Over the earth keeps watch the eye of light,
Guardeth lovingly the good man's ways,
Sheddeth round him its consoling rays;--
Praise be to the Lord in heaven's height!



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FEAST AT SOLHOUG***


******* This file should be named 18428.txt or 18428.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/4/2/18428



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
