Paz~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Paz, by Honore de Balzac

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Paz
       (La Fausse Maitresse)

Author: Honore de Balzac

Translator: Katharine Prescott Wormeley

Release Date: July, 1998  [Etext #1369]
Posting Date: February 23, 2010
Last Updated: November 23, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAZ ***




Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny





PAZ

(La Fausse Maitresse)


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley



                             DEDICATION

              Dedicated to the Comtesse Clara Maffei.





PAZ

(LA FAUSSE MAITRESSE)




I


In September, 1835, one of the richest heiresses of the faubourg
Saint-Germain, Mademoiselle du Rouvre, the only daughter of the Marquis
du Rouvre, married Comte Adam Mitgislas Laginski, a young Polish exile.

We ask permission to write these Polish names as they are pronounced,
to spare our readers the aspect of the fortifications of consonants
by which the Slave language protects its vowels,--probably not to lose
them, considering how few there are.

The Marquis du Rouvre had squandered nearly the whole of a princely
fortune, which he obtained originally through his marriage with a
Demoiselle de Ronquerolles. Therefore, on her mother’s side Clementine
du Rouvre had the Marquis de Ronquerolles for uncle, and Madame de
Serizy for aunt. On her father’s side she had another uncle in the
eccentric person of the Chevalier du Rouvre, a younger son of the house,
an old bachelor who had become very rich by speculating in lands and
houses. The Marquis de Ronquerolles had the misfortune to lose both
his children at the time of the cholera, and the only son of Madame
de Serizy, a young soldier of great promise, perished in Africa in
the affair of the Makta. In these days rich families stand between the
danger of impoverishing their children if they have too many, or of
extinguishing their names if they have too few,--a singular result of
the Code which Napoleon never thought of. By a curious turn of fortune
Clementine became, in spite of her father having squandered his
substance on Florine (one of the most charming actresses in Paris), a
great heiress. The Marquis de Ronquerolles, a clever diplomatist under
the new dynasty, his sister, Madame de Serizy, and the Chevalier du
Rouvre agreed, in order to save their fortunes from the dissipations of
the marquis, to settle them on their niece, to whom, moreover, they each
pledged themselves to pay ten thousand francs a year from the day of her
marriage.

It is quite unnecessary to say that the Polish count, though an exile,
was no expense to the French government. Comte Adam Laginski belonged
to one of the oldest and most illustrious families in Poland, which was
allied to many of the princely houses of Germany,--Sapieha, Radziwill,
Mniszech, Rzewuski, Czartoryski, Leczinski, Lubormirski, and all the
other great Sarmatian SKIS. But heraldic knowledge is not the most
distinguishing feature of the French nation under Louis-Philippe, and
Polish nobility was no great recommendation to the bourgeoisie who were
lording it in those days. Besides, when Adam first made his appearance,
in 1833, on the boulevard des Italiens, at Frascati, and at the
Jockey-Club, he was leading the life of a young man who, having lost his
political prospects, was taking his pleasure in Parisian dissipation. At
first he was thought to be a student.

The Polish nationality had at this period fallen as low in French
estimation, thanks to a shameful governmental reaction, as the
republicans had sought to raise it. The singular struggle of the
Movement against Resistance (two words which will be inexplicable thirty
years hence) made sport of what ought to have been truly respected,--the
name of a conquered nation to whom the French had offered hospitality,
for whom fetes had been given (with songs and dances by subscription),
above all, a nation which in the Napoleonic struggle between France and
Europe had given us six thousand men, and what men!

Do not infer from this that either side is taken here; either that
of the Emperor Nicholas against Poland, or that of Poland against the
Emperor. It would be a foolish thing to slip political discussion into
tales that are intended to amuse or interest. Besides, Russia and Poland
were both right,--one to wish the unity of its empire, the other
to desire its liberty. Let us say in passing that Poland might have
conquered Russia by the influence of her morals instead of fighting her
with weapons; she should have imitated China which, in the end, Chinesed
the Tartars, and will, it is to be hoped, Chinese the English. Poland
ought to have Polonized Russia. Poniatowski tried to do so in the
least favorable portion of the empire; but as a king he was little
understood,--because, possibly, he did not fully understand himself.

But how could the Parisians avoid disliking an unfortunate people who
were the cause of that shameful falsehood enacted during the famous
review at which all Paris declared its will to succor Poland? The Poles
were held up to them as the allies of the republican party, and they
never once remembered that Poland was a republic of aristocrats. From
that day forth the bourgeoisie treated with base contempt the exiles of
the nation it had worshipped a few days earlier. The wind of a riot
is always enough to veer the Parisians from north to south under any
regime. It is necessary to remember these sudden fluctuations of feeling
in order to understand why it was that in 1835 the word “Pole” conveyed
a derisive meaning to a people who consider themselves the wittiest and
most courteous nation on earth, and their city of Paris the focus of
enlightenment, with the sceptre of arts and literature within its grasp.

There are, alas! two sorts of Polish exiles,--the republican Poles,
sons of Lelewel, and the noble Poles, at the head of whom is Prince Adam
Czartoryski. The two classes are like fire and water; but why complain
of that? Such divisions are always to be found among exiles, no matter
of what nation they may be, or in what countries they take refuge. They
carry their countries and their hatreds with them. Two French priests,
who had emigrated to Brussels during the Revolution, showed the utmost
horror of each other, and when one of them was asked why, he replied
with a glance at his companion in misery: “Why? because he’s a
Jansenist!” Dante would gladly have stabbed a Guelf had he met him in
exile. This explains the virulent attacks of the French against the
venerable Prince Adam Czartoryski, and the dislike shown to the better
class of Polish exiles by the shopkeeping Caesars and the licensed
Alexanders of Paris.

In 1834, therefore, Adam Mitgislas Laginski was something of a butt for
Parisian pleasantry.

“He is rather nice, though he is a Pole,” said Rastignac.

“All these Poles pretend to be great lords,” said Maxime de Trailles,
“but this one does pay his gambling debts, and I begin to think he must
have property.”

Without wishing to offend these banished men, it may be allowable to
remark that the light-hearted, careless inconsistency of the Sarmatian
character does justify in some degree the satire of the Parisians, who,
by the bye, would behave in like circumstances exactly as the Poles do.
The French aristocracy, so nobly succored during the Revolution by the
Polish lords, certainly did not return the kindness in 1832. Let us
have the melancholy courage to admit this, and to say that the faubourg
Saint-Germain is still the debtor of Poland.

Was Comte Adam rich, or was he poor, or was he an adventurer?
This problem was long unsolved. The diplomatic salons, faithful to
instructions, imitated the silence of the Emperor Nicholas, who held
that all Polish exiles were virtually dead and buried. The court of the
Tuileries, and all who took their cue from it, gave striking proof of
the political quality which was then dignified by the name of sagacity.
They turned their backs on a Russian prince with whom they had all been
on intimate terms during the Emigration, merely because it was said that
the Emperor Nicholas gave him the cold shoulder. Between the caution
of the court and the prudence of the diplomates, the Polish exiles of
distinction lived in Paris in the Biblical solitude of “super flumina
Babylonis,” or else they haunted a few salons which were the neutral
ground of all opinions. In a city of pleasure, like Paris, where
amusements abound on all sides, the heedless gayety of a Pole finds
twice as many encouragements as it needs to a life of dissipation.

It must be said, however, that Adam had two points against him,--his
appearance, and his mental equipment. There are two species of Pole, as
there are two species of Englishwoman. When an Englishwoman is not
very handsome she is horribly ugly. Comte Adam belonged in the second
category of human beings. His small face, rather sharp in expression,
looked as if it had been pressed in a vise. His short nose, and fair
hair, and reddish beard and moustache made him look all the more like a
goat because he was small and thin, and his tarnished yellow eyes caught
you with that oblique look which Virgil celebrates. How came he, in
spite of such obvious disadvantages, to possess really exquisite manners
and a distinguished air? The problem is solved partly by the care and
elegance of his dress, and partly by the training given him by his
mother, a Radziwill. His courage amounted to daring, but his mind
was not more than was needed for the ephemeral talk and pleasantry of
Parisian conversation. And yet it would have been difficult to find
among the young men of fashion in Paris a single one who was his
superior. Young men talk a great deal too much in these days of horses,
money, taxes, deputies; French _conversation_ is no longer what it was.
Brilliancy of mind needs leisure and certain social inequalities to
bring it out. There is, probably, more real conversation in Vienna or
St. Petersburg than in Paris. Equals do not need to employ delicacy or
shrewdness in speech; they blurt out things as they are. Consequently
the dandies of Paris did not discover the great seigneur in the rather
heedless young fellow who, in their talks, would flit from one subject
to another, all the more intent upon amusement because he had just
escaped from a great peril, and, finding himself in a city where his
family was unknown, felt at liberty to lead a loose life without the
risk of disgracing his name.

But one fine day in 1834 Adam suddenly bought a house in the rue de la
Pepiniere. Six months later his style of living was second to none in
Paris. About the time when he thus began to take himself seriously he
had seen Clementine du Rouvre at the Opera and had fallen in love with
her. A year later the marriage took place. The salon of Madame d’Espard
was the first to sound his praises. Mothers of daughters then learned
too late that as far back as the year 900 the family of the Laginski was
among the most illustrious of the North. By an act of prudence which was
very unPolish, the mother of the young count had mortgaged her entire
property on the breaking out of the insurrection for an immense sum
lent by two Jewish bankers in Paris. Comte Adam was now in possession of
eighty thousand francs a year. When this was discovered society ceased
to be surprised at the imprudence which had been laid to the charge
of Madame de Serizy, the Marquis de Ronquerolles, and the Chevalier du
Rouvre in yielding to the foolish passion of their niece. People jumped,
as usual, from one extreme of judgment to the other.

During the winter of 1836 Comte Adam was the fashion, and Clementine
Laginska one of the queens of Paris. Madame Laginska is now a member
of that charming circle of young women represented by Mesdames de
Lestorade, de Portenduere, Marie de Vandenesse, du Guenic, and de
Maufrigneuse, the flowers of our present Paris, who live at such
immeasurable distance from the parvenus, the vulgarians, and the
speculators of the new regime.

This preamble is necessary to show the sphere in which was done one
of those noble actions, less rare than the calumniators of our time
admit,--actions which, like pearls, the fruit of pain and suffering, are
hidden within rough shells, lost in the gulf, the sea, the tossing waves
of what we call society, the century, Paris, London, St. Petersburg,--or
what you will.

If the axiom that architecture is the expression of manner and morals
was ever proved, it was certainly after the insurrection of 1830, during
the present reign of the house of Orleans. As all the old fortunes
are diminishing in France, the majestic mansions of our ancestors are
constantly being demolished and replaced by species of phalansteries, in
which the peers of July occupy the third floor above some newly
enriched empirics on the lower floors. A mixture of styles is confusedly
employed. As there is no longer a real court or nobility to give the
tone, there is no harmony in the production of art. Never, on the other
hand, has architecture discovered so many economical ways of imitating
the real and the solid, or displayed more resources, more talent, in
distributing them. Propose to an architect to build upon the garden
at the back of an old mansion, and he will run you up a little Louvre
overloaded with ornament. He will manage to get in a courtyard, stables,
and if you care for it, a garden. Inside the house he will accommodate a
quantity of little rooms and passages. He is so clever in deceiving the
eye that you think you will have plenty of space; but it is only a nest
of small rooms, after all, in which a ducal family has to turn itself
about in the space that its own bakehouse formerly occupied.

The hotel of the Comtesse Laginska, rue de la Pepiniere, is one of these
creations, and stands between court and garden. On the right, in the
court, are the kitchens and offices; to the left the coachhouse and
stables. The porter’s lodge is between two charming portes-cocheres. The
chief luxury of the house is a delightful greenhouse contrived at the
end of a boudoir on the ground-floor which opens upon an admirable
suite of reception rooms. An English philanthropist had built this
architectural bijou, designed the garden, added the greenhouse, polished
the doors, bricked the courtyard, painted the window-frames green,
and realized, in short, a dream which resembled (proportions excepted)
George the Fourth’s Pavilion at Brighton. The inventive and industrious
Parisian workmen had moulded the doors and window-frames; the ceilings
were imitated from the middle-ages or those of a Venetian palace; marble
veneering abounded on the outer walls. Steinbock and Francois Souchet
had designed the mantel-pieces and the panels above the doors; Schinner
had painted the ceilings in his masterly manner. The beauties of the
staircase, white as a woman’s arm, defied those of the hotel Rothschild.
On account of the riots and the unsettled times, the cost of this folly
was only about eleven hundred thousand francs,--to an Englishman a mere
nothing. All this luxury, called princely by persons who do not know
what real princes are, was built in the garden of the house of a
purveyor made a Croesus by the Revolution, who had escaped to Brussels
and died there after going into bankruptcy. The Englishman died in
Paris, of Paris; for to many persons Paris is a disease,--sometimes
several diseases. His widow, a Methodist, had a horror of the little
nabob establishment, and ordered it to be sold. Comte Adam bought it at
a bargain; and how he came to do so shall presently be made known, for
bargains were not at all in his line as a grand seigneur.

Behind the house lay the verdant velvet of an English lawn shaded at
the lower end by a clump of exotic trees, in the midst of which stood a
Chinese pagoda with soundless belfries and motionless golden eggs. The
greenhouse concealed the garden wall on the northern side, the opposite
wall was covered with climbing plants trained upon poles painted green
and connected with crossway trellises. This lawn, this world of flowers,
the gravelled paths, the simulated forest, the verdant palisades, were
contained within the space of five and twenty square rods, which are
worth to-day four hundred thousand francs,--the value of an actual
forest. Here, in this solitude in the middle of Paris, the birds
sang, thrushes, nightingales, warblers, bulfinches, and sparrows. The
greenhouse was like an immense jardiniere, filling the air with perfume
in winter as in summer. The means by which its atmosphere was made
to order, torrid as in China or temperate as in Italy, were cleverly
concealed. Pipes in which hot water circulated, or steam, were either
hidden under ground or festooned with plants overhead. The boudoir was a
large room. The miracle of the modern Parisian fairy named Architecture
is to get all these many and great things out of a limited bit of
ground.

The boudoir of the young countess was arranged to suit the taste of the
artist to whom Comte Adam entrusted the decoration of the house. It is
too full of pretty nothings to be a place for repose; one scarce knows
where to sit down among carved Chinese work-tables with their myriads
of fantastic figures inlaid in ivory, cups of yellow topaz mounted on
filagree, mosaics which inspire theft, Dutch pictures in the style which
Schinner has adopted, angels such as Steinbock conceived but often could
not execute, statuettes modelled by genius pursued by creditors (the
real explanation of the Arabian myth), superb sketches by our best
artists, lids of chests made into panels alternating with fluted
draperies of Italian silk, portieres hanging from rods of old oak
in tapestried masses on which the figures of some hunting scene are
swarming, pieces of furniture worthy to have belonged to Madame de
Pompadour, Persian rugs, et cetera. For a last graceful touch, all these
elegant things were subdued by the half-light which filtered through
embroidered curtains and added to their charm. On a table between the
windows, among various curiosities, lay a whip, the handle designed
by Mademoiselle de Fauveau, which proved that the countess rode on
horseback.

Such is a lady’s boudoir in 1837,--an exhibition of the contents of many
shops, which amuse the eye, as if ennui were the one thing to be dreaded
by the social world of the liveliest and most stirring capital in
Europe. Why is there nothing of an inner life? nothing which leads to
revery, nothing reposeful? Why indeed? Because no one in our day is sure
of the future; we are living our lives like prodigal annuitants.

One morning Clementine appeared to be thinking of something. She was
lying at full length on one of those marvellous couches from which it
is almost impossible to rise, the upholsterer having invented them for
lovers of the “far niente” and its attendant joys of laziness to sink
into. The doors of the greenhouse were open, letting the odors of
vegetation and the perfume of the tropics pervade the room. The young
wife was looking at her husband who was smoking a narghile, the only
form of pipe she would have suffered in that room. The portieres, held
back by cords, gave a vista through two elegant salons, one white and
gold, comparable only to that of the hotel Forbin-Janson, the other in
the style of the Renaissance. The dining-room, which had no rival in
Paris except that of the Baron de Nucingen, was at the end of a short
gallery decorated in the manner of the middle-ages. This gallery opened
on the side of the courtyard upon a large antechamber, through which
could be seen the beauties of the staircase.

The count and countess had just finished breakfast; the sky was a sheet
of azure without a cloud, April was nearly over. They had been married
two years, and Clementine had just discovered for the first time that
there was something resembling a secret or a mystery in her household.
The Pole, let us say it to his honor, is usually helpless before a
woman; he is so full of tenderness for her that in Poland he becomes her
inferior, though Polish women make admirable wives. Now a Pole is still
more easily vanquished by a Parisian woman. Consequently Comte Adam,
pressed by questions, did not even attempt the innocent roguery of
selling the suspected secret. It is always wise with a woman to get
some good out of a mystery; she will like you the better for it, as a
swindler respects an honest man the more when he finds he cannot swindle
him. Brave in heart but not in speech, Comte Adam merely stipulated that
he should not be compelled to answer until he had finished his narghile.

“If any difficulty occurred when we were travelling,” said Clementine,
“you always dismissed it by saying, ‘Paz will settle that.’ You never
wrote to any one but Paz. When we returned here everybody kept saying,
‘the captain, the captain.’ If I want the carriage--‘the captain.’ Is
there a bill to pay--‘the captain.’ If my horse is not properly
bitted, they must speak to Captain Paz. In short, it is like a game of
dominoes--Paz is everywhere. I hear of nothing but Paz, but I never see
Paz. Who and what is Paz? Why don’t you bring forth your Paz?”

“Isn’t everything going on right?” asked the count, taking the
“bocchettino” of his narghile from his lips.

“Everything is going on so right that other people with an income of two
hundred thousand francs would ruin themselves by going at our pace, and
we have only one hundred and ten thousand.”

So saying she pulled the bell-cord (an exquisite bit of needlework). A
footman entered, dressed like a minister.

“Tell Captain Paz that I wish to see him.”

“If you think you are going to find out anything that way--” said Comte
Adam, laughing.

It is well to mention that Adam and Clementine, married in December,
1835, had gone soon after the wedding to Italy, Switzerland, and
Germany, where they spent the greater part of two years. Returning to
Paris in November, 1837, the countess entered society for the first time
as a married woman during the winter which had just ended, and she then
became aware of the existence, half-suppressed and wholly dumb but very
useful, of a species of factotum who was personally invisible, named
Paz,--spelt thus, but pronounced “Patz.”

“Monsieur le capitaine Paz begs Madame la comtesse to excuse him,” said
the footman, returning. “He is at the stables; as soon as he has changed
his dress Comte Paz will present himself to Madame.”

“What was he doing at the stables?”

“He was showing them how to groom Madame’s horse,” said the man. “He was
not pleased with the way Constantin did it.”

The countess looked at the footman. He was perfectly serious and did not
add to his words the sort of smile by which servants usually comment
on the actions of a superior who seems to them to derogate from his
position.

“Ah! he was grooming Cora.”

“Madame la comtesse intends to ride out this morning?” said the footman,
leaving the room without further answer.

“Is Paz a Pole?” asked Clementine, turning to her husband, who nodded by
way of affirmation.

Madame Laginska was silent, examining Adam. With her feet extended upon
a cushion and her head poised like that of a bird on the edge of
its nest listening to the noises in a grove, she would have seemed
enchanting even to a blase man. Fair and slender, and wearing her
hair in curls, she was not unlike those semi-romantic pictures in
the Keepsakes, especially when dressed, as she was this morning, in a
breakfast gown of Persian silk, the folds of which could not disguise
the beauty of her figure or the slimness of her waist. The silk with its
brilliant colors being crossed upon the bosom showed the spring of the
neck,--its whiteness contrasting delightfully against the tones of a
guipure lace which lay upon her shoulders. Her eyes and their long
black lashes added at this moment to the expression of curiosity which
puckered her pretty mouth. On the forehead, which was well modelled,
an observer would have noticed a roundness characteristic of the true
Parisian woman,--self-willed, merry, well-informed, but inaccessible
to vulgar seductions. Her hands, which were almost transparent, were
hanging down at the end of each arm of her chair; the tapering fingers,
slightly turned up at their points, showed nails like almonds, which
caught the light. Adam smiled at his wife’s impatience, and looked at
her with a glance which two years of married life had not yet chilled.
Already the little countess had made herself mistress of the situation,
for she scarcely paid attention to her husband’s admiration. In fact,
in the look which she occasionally cast at him, there seemed to be the
consciousness of a Frenchwoman’s ascendancy over the puny, volatile, and
red-haired Pole.

“Here comes Paz,” said the count, hearing a step which echoed through
the gallery.

The countess beheld a tall and handsome man, well-made, and bearing
on his face the signs of pain which come of inward strength and secret
endurance of sorrow. He wore one of those tight, frogged overcoats which
were then called “polonaise.” Thick, black hair, rather unkempt, covered
his square head, and Clementine noticed his broad forehead shining like
a block of white marble, for Paz held his visored cap in his hand.
The hand itself was like that of the Infant Hercules. Robust health
flourished on his face, which was divided by a large Roman nose and
reminded Clementine of some handsome Transteverino. A black silk cravat
added to the martial appearance of this six-foot mystery, with eyes of
jet and Italian fervor. The amplitude of his pleated trousers, which
allowed only the tips of his boots to be seen, revealed his faithfulness
to the fashions of his own land. There was something really burlesque
to a romantic woman in the striking contrast no one could fail to remark
between the captain and the count, the little Pole with his pinched face
and the stalwart soldier.

“Good morning, Adam,” he said familiarly. Then he bowed courteously as
he asked Clementine what he could do for her.

“You are Laginski’s friend!” exclaimed the countess.

“For life and death,” answered Paz, to whom the count threw a smile of
affection as he drew a last puff from his perfumed pipe.

“Then why don’t you take your meals with us? why did you not accompany
us to Italy and Switzerland? why do you hide yourself in such a way that
I am unable to thank you for the constant services that you do for us?”
 said the countess, with much vivacity of manner but no feeling.

In fact, she thought she perceived in Paz a sort of voluntary servitude.
Such an idea carried with it in her mind a certain contempt for a social
amphibian, a being half-secretary, half-bailiff, and yet neither the one
nor the other, a poor relation, an embarrassing friend.

“Because, countess,” he answered with perfect ease of manner, “there are
no thanks due. I am Adam’s friend, and it gives me pleasure to take care
of his interests.”

“And you remain standing for your pleasure, too,” remarked Comte Adam.

Paz sat down on a chair near the door.

“I remember seeing you about the time I was married, and afterwards
in the courtyard,” said Clementine. “But why do you put yourself in a
position of inferiority,--you, Adam’s friend?”

“I am perfectly indifferent to the opinion of the Parisians,” he
replied. “I live for myself, or, if you like, for you two.”

“But the opinion of the world as to a friend of my husband is not
indifferent to me--”

“Ah, madame, the world will be satisfied if you tell them I am ‘an
original.’”

After a moment’s silence he added, “Are you going out to-day?”

“Will you come with us to the Bois?”

“Certainly.”

So saying, Paz bowed and withdrew.

“What a good soul he is!” said Adam. “He has all the simplicity of a
child.”

“Now tell me all about your relations with him,” said Clementine.

“Paz, my dear,” said Laginski, “belongs to a noble family as old and
illustrious as our own. One of the Pazzi of Florence, at the time of
their disasters, fled to Poland, where he settled with some of his
property and founded the Paz family, to which the title of count was
granted. This family, which distinguished itself greatly in the glorious
days of our royal republic, became rich. The graft from the tree that
was felled in Italy flourished so vigorously in Poland that there are
several branches of the family still there. I need not tell you that
some are rich and some are poor. Our Paz is the scion of a poor branch.
He was an orphan, without other fortune than his sword, when he served
in the regiment of the Grand Duke Constantine at the time of our
revolution. Joining the Polish cause, he fought like a Pole, like a
patriot, like a man who has nothing,--three good reasons for fighting
well. In his last affair, thinking he was followed by his men, he dashed
upon a Russian battery and was taken prisoner. I was there. His brave
act roused me. ‘Let us go and get him!’ I said to my troop, and we
charged the battery like a lot of foragers. I got Paz--I was the seventh
man; we started twenty and came back eight, counting Paz. After Warsaw
was sold we were forced to escape those Russians. By a curious chance,
Paz and I happened to come together again, at the same hour and the same
place, on the other side of the Vistula. I saw the poor captain arrested
by some Prussians, who made themselves the blood-hounds of the Russians.
When we have fished a man out of the Styx we cling to him. This new
danger for poor Paz made me so unhappy that I let myself be taken too,
thinking I could help him. Two men can get away where one will
perish. Thanks to my name and some family connections in Prussia, the
authorities shut their eyes to my escape. I got my dear captain through
as a man of no consequence, a family servant, and we reached Dantzic.
There we got on board a Dutch vessel and went to London. It took us two
months to get there. My mother was ill in England, and expecting me.
Paz and I took care of her till her death, which the Polish troubles
hastened. Then we left London and came to France. Men who go through
such adversities become like brothers. When I reached Paris, at
twenty-two years of age, and found I had an income of over sixty
thousand francs a year, without counting the proceeds of the diamonds
and the pictures sold by my mother, I wanted to secure the future of
my dear Paz before I launched into dissipation. I had often noticed the
sadness in his eyes--sometimes tears were in them. I had had good reason
to understand his soul, which is noble, grand, and generous to the core.
I thought he might not like to be bound by benefits to a friend who
was six years younger than himself, unless he could repay them. I was
careless and frivolous, just as a young fellow is, and I knew I was
certain to ruin myself at play, or get inveigled by some woman, and Paz
and I might then be parted; and though I had every intention of always
looking out for him, I knew I might sometime or other forget to provide
for him. In short, my dear angel, I wanted to spare him the pain and
mortification of having to ask me for money, or of having to hunt me up
if he got into distress. SO, one morning, after breakfast, when we were
sitting with our feet on the andirons smoking pipes, I produced,--with
the utmost precaution, for I saw him look at me uneasily,--a certificate
of the Funds payable to bearer for a certain sum of money a year.”

Clementine jumped up and went and seated herself on Adam’s knee, put
her arms round his neck, and kissed him. “Dear treasure!” she said, “how
handsome he is! Well, what did Paz do?”

“Thaddeus turned pale,” said the count, “but he didn’t say a word.”

“Oh! his name is Thaddeus, is it?”

“Yes; Thaddeus folded the paper and gave it back to me, and then he
said: ‘I thought, Adam, that we were one for life or death, and that we
should never part. Do you want to be rid of me?’ ‘Oh!’ I said, ‘if you
take it that way, Thaddeus, don’t let us say another word about it. If
I ruin myself you shall be ruined too.’ ‘You haven’t fortune enough to
live as a Laginski should,’ he said, ‘and you need a friend who will
take care of your affairs, and be a father and a brother and a trusty
confidant.’ My dear child, as Paz said that he had in his look and
voice, calm as they were, a maternal emotion, and also the gratitude
of an Arab, the fidelity of a dog, the friendship of a savage,--not
displayed, but ever ready. Faith! I seized him, as we Poles do, with
a hand on each shoulder, and I kissed him on the lips. ‘For life and
death, then! all that I have is yours--do what you will with it.’ It was
he who found me this house and bought it for next to nothing. He sold my
Funds high and bought in low, and we have paid for this barrack with
the profits. He knows horses, and he manages to buy and sell at such
advantage that my stable really costs very little; and yet I have the
finest horses and the most elegant equipages in all Paris. Our servants,
brave Polish soldiers chosen by him, would go through fire and water
for us. I seem, as you say, to be ruining myself; and yet Paz keeps the
house with such method and economy that he has even repaired some of my
foolish losses at play,--the thoughtless folly of a young man. My dear,
Thaddeus is as shrewd as two Genoese, as eager for gain as a Polish Jew,
and provident as a good housekeeper. I never could force him to live as
I did when I was a bachelor. Sometimes I had to use a sort of friendly
coercion to make him go to the theatre with me when I was alone, or to
the jovial little dinners I used to give at a tavern. He doesn’t like
social life.”

“What does he like, then?” asked Clementine.

“Poland; he loves Poland and pines for it. His only spendings are
sums he gives, more in my name than in his own, to some of our poor
brother-exiles.”

“Well, I shall love him, the fine fellow!” said the countess, “he looks
to me as simple-hearted as he is grand.”

“All these pretty things you have about you,” continued Adam, who
praised his friend in the noblest sincerity, “he picked up; he bought
them at auction, or as bargains from the dealers. Oh! he’s keener than
they are themselves. If you see him rubbing his hands in the courtyard,
you may be sure he has traded away one good horse for a better. He lives
for me; his happiness is to see me elegant, in a perfectly appointed
equipage. The duties he takes upon himself are all accomplished without
fuss or emphasis. One evening I lost twenty thousand francs at whist.
‘What will Paz say?’ thought I as I walked home. Paz paid them to me,
not without a sigh; but he never reproached me, even by a look. But
that sigh of his restrained me more than the remonstrances of uncles,
mothers, or wives could have done. ‘Do you regret the money?’ I said
to him. ‘Not for you or me, no,’ he replied; ‘but I was thinking
that twenty poor Poles could have lived a year on that sum.’ You must
understand that the Pazzi are fully the equal of the Laginski, so I
couldn’t regard my dear Paz as an inferior. I never went out or came in
without going first to Paz, as I would to my father. My fortune is his;
and Thaddeus knows that if danger threatened him I would fling myself
into it and drag him out, as I have done before.”

“And that is saying a good deal, my dear friend,” said the countess.
“Devotion is like a flash of lightning. Men devote themselves in battle,
but they no longer have the heart for it in Paris.”

“Well,” replied Adam, “I am always ready, as in battle, to devote
myself to Paz. Our two characters have kept their natural asperities
and defects, but the mutual comprehension of our souls has tightened the
bond already close between us. It is quite possible to save a man’s life
and kill him afterwards if we find him a bad fellow; but Paz and I know
THAT of each other which makes our friendship indissoluble. There’s
a constant exchange of happy thoughts and impressions between us; and
really, perhaps, such a friendship as ours is richer than love.”

A pretty hand closed the count’s mouth so promptly that the action was
somewhat like a blow.

“Yes,” he said, “friendship, my dear angel, knows nothing of bankrupt
sentiments and collapsed joys. Love, after giving more than it has, ends
by giving less than it receives.”

“One side as well as the other,” remarked Clementine laughing.

“Yes,” continued Adam, “whereas friendship only increases. You need not
pucker up your lips at that, for we are, you and I, as much friends as
lovers; we have, at least I hope so, combined the two sentiments in our
happy marriage.”

“I’ll explain to you what it is that has made you and Thaddeus such good
friends,” said Clementine. “The difference in the lives you lead
comes from your tastes and from necessity; from your likings, not your
positions. As far as one can judge from merely seeing a man once, and
also from what you tell me, there are times when the subaltern might
become the superior.”

“Oh, Paz is truly my superior,” said Adam, naively; “I have no advantage
over him except mere luck.”

His wife kissed him for the generosity of those words.

“The extreme care with which he hides the grandeur of his feelings is
one form of his superiority,” continued the count. “I said to him once:
‘You are a sly one; you have in your heart a vast domain within which
you live and think.’ He has a right to the title of count; but in Paris
he won’t be called anything but captain.”

“The fact is that the Florentine of the middle-ages has reappeared in
our century,” said the countess. “Dante and Michael Angelo are in him.”

“That’s the very truth,” cried Adam. “He is a poet in soul.”

“So here I am, married to two Poles,” said the young countess, with a
gesture worthy of some genius of the stage.

“Dear child!” said Adam, pressing her to him, “it would have made me
very unhappy if my friend did not please you. We were both rather afraid
of it, he and I, though he was delighted at my marriage. You will
make him very happy if you tell him that you love him,--yes, as an old
friend.”

“I’ll go and dress, the day is so fine; and we will all three ride
together,” said Clementine, ringing for her maid.




II


Paz was leading so subterranean a life that the fashionable world of
Paris asked who he was when the Comtesse Laginska was seen in the Bois
de Boulogne riding between her husband and a stranger. During the ride
Clementine insisted that Thaddeus should dine with them. This caprice of
the sovereign lady compelled Paz to make an evening toilet. Clementine
dressed for the occasion with a certain coquetry, in a style that
impressed even Adam himself when she entered the salon where the two
friends awaited her.

“Comte Paz,” she said, “you must go with us to the Opera.”

This was said in the tone which, coming from a woman means: “If you
refuse we shall quarrel.”

“Willingly, madame,” replied the captain. “But as I have not the fortune
of a count, have the kindness to call me captain.”

“Very good, captain; give me your arm,” she said,--taking it and
leading the way to the dining-room with the flattering familiarity which
enchants all lovers.

The countess placed the captain beside her; his behavior was that of
a poor sub-lieutenant dining at his general’s table. He let Clementine
talk, listened deferentially as to a superior, did not differ with her
in anything, and waited to be questioned before he spoke at all. He
seemed actually stupid to the countess, whose coquettish little ways
missed their mark in presence of such frigid gravity and conventional
respect. In vain Adam kept saying: “Do be lively, Thaddeus; one would
really suppose you were not at home. You must have made a wager to
disconcert Clementine.” Thaddeus continued heavy and half asleep.
When the servants left the room at the end of the dessert the captain
explained that his habits were diametrically opposite to those of
society,--he went to bed at eight o’clock and got up very early in the
morning; and he excused his dulness on the ground of being sleepy.

“My intention in taking you to the Opera was to amuse you, captain; but
do as you prefer,” said Clementine, rather piqued.

“I will go,” said Paz.

“Duprez sings ‘Guillaume Tell,’” remarked Adam. “But perhaps you would
rather go to the ‘Varietes’?”

The captain smiled and rang the bell. “Tell Constantin,” he said to the
footman, “to put the horses to the carriage instead of the coupe. We
should be rather squeezed otherwise,” he said to the count.

“A Frenchman would have forgotten that,” remarked Clementine, smiling.

“Ah! but we are Florentines transplanted to the North,” answered
Thaddeus with a refinement of accent and a look in his eyes which
made his conduct at table seem assumed for the occasion. There was
too evident a contrast between his involuntary self-revelation in this
speech and his behavior during dinner. Clementine examined the captain
with a few of those covert glances which show a woman’s surprise and
also her capacity for observation.

It resulted from this little incident that silence reigned in the salon
while the three took their coffee, a silence rather annoying to Adam,
who was incapable of imagining the cause of it. Clementine no longer
tried to draw out Thaddeus. The captain, on the other hand, retreated
within his military stiffness and came out of it no more, neither on the
way to the Opera nor in the box, where he seemed to be asleep.

“You see, madame, that I am a very stupid man,” he said during the dance
in the last act of “Guillaume Tell.” “Am I not right to keep, as the
saying is, to my own specialty?”

“In truth, my dear captain, you are neither a talker nor a man of the
world, but you are perhaps Polish.”

“Therefore leave me to look after your pleasures, your property, your
household--it is all I am good for.”

“Tartufe! pooh!” cried Adam, laughing. “My dear, he is full of ardor;
he is thoroughly educated; he can, if he chooses, hold his own in any
salon. Clementine, don’t believe his modesty.”

“Adieu, comtesse; I have obeyed your wishes so far; and now I will take
the carriage and go home to bed and send it back for you.”

Clementine bowed her head and let him go without replying.

“What a bear!” she said to the count. “You are a great deal nicer.”

Adam pressed her hand when no one was looking.

“Poor, dear Thaddeus,” he said, “he is trying to make himself
disagreeable where most men would try to seem more amiable than I.”

“Oh!” she said, “I am not sure but what there is some _calculation_ in
his behavior; he would have taken in an ordinary woman.”

Half an hour later, when the chasseur, Boleslas, called out “Gate!” and
the carriage was waiting for it to swing back, Clementine said to her
husband, “Where does the captain perch?”

“Why, there!” replied Adam, pointing to a floor above the porte-cochere
which had one window looking on the street. “His apartments are over the
coachhouse.”

“Who lives on the other side?” asked the countess.

“No one as yet,” said Adam; “I mean that apartment for our children and
their instructors.”

“He didn’t go to bed,” said the countess, observing lights in Thaddeus’s
rooms when the carriage had passed under the portico supported by
columns copied from those of the Tuileries, which replaced a vulgar zinc
awning painted in stripes like cloth.

The captain, in his dressing-gown with a pipe in his mouth, was watching
Clementine as she entered the vestibule. The day had been a hard one for
him. And here is the reason why: A great and terrible emotion had taken
possession of his heart on the day when Adam made him go to the Opera
to see and give his opinion on Mademoiselle du Rouvre; and again when he
saw her on the occasion of her marriage, and recognized in her the woman
whom a man is forced to love exclusively. For this reason Paz strongly
advised and promoted the long journey to Italy and elsewhere after the
marriage. At peace so long as Clementine was away, his trial was renewed
on the return of the happy household. As he sat at his window on this
memorable night, smoking his latakia in a pipe of wild-cherry wood
six feet long, given to him by Adam, these are the thoughts that were
passing through his mind:--

“I, and God, who will reward me for suffering in silence, alone know
how I love her! But how shall I manage to have neither her love nor her
dislike?”

And his thoughts travelled far on this strange theme.

It must not be supposed that Thaddeus was living without pleasure, in
the midst of his sufferings. The deceptions of this day, for instance,
were a source of inward joy to him. Since the return of the count and
countess he had daily felt ineffable satisfactions in knowing himself
necessary to a household which, without his devotion to its interests,
would infallibly have gone to ruin. What fortune can bear the strain of
reckless prodigality? Clementine, brought up by a spendthrift father,
knew nothing of the management of a household which the women of the
present day, however rich or noble they are, are often compelled to
undertake themselves. How few, in these days, keep a steward. Adam, on
the other hand, son of one of the great Polish lords who let themselves
be preyed on by the Jews, and are wholly incapable of managing even the
wreck of their vast fortunes (for fortunes are vast in Poland), was
not of a nature to check his own fancies or those of his wife. Left to
himself he would probably have been ruined before his marriage. Paz had
prevented him from gambling at the Bourse, and that says all.

Under these circumstances, Thaddeus, feeling that he loved Clementine
in spite of himself, had not the resource of leaving the house and
travelling in other lands to forget his passion. Gratitude, the key-note
of his life, held him bound to that household where he alone could look
after the affairs of the heedless owners. The long absence of Adam
and Clementine had given him peace. But the countess had returned
more lovely than ever, enjoying the freedom which marriage brings to a
Parisian woman, displaying the graces of a young wife and the nameless
attraction she gains from the happiness, or the independence, bestowed
upon her by a young man as trustful, as chivalric, and as much in
love as Adam. To know that he was the pivot on which the splendor the
household depended, to see Clementine when she got out of her carriage
on returning from some fete, or got into it in the morning when she took
her drive, to meet her on the boulevards in her pretty equipage,
looking like a flower in a whorl of leaves, inspired poor Thaddeus with
mysterious delights, which glowed in the depths of his heart but gave no
signs upon his face.

How happened it that for five whole months the countess had never
perceived the captain? Because he hid himself from her knowledge, and
carefully concealed the pains he took to avoid her. Nothing so resembles
the Divine love as hopeless human love. A man must have great depth of
heart to devote himself in silence and obscurity to a woman. In such
a heart is the worship of love for love’s sake only--sublime avarice,
sublime because ever generous and founded on the mysterious existence
of the principles of creation. _Effect_ is nature, and nature is
enchanting; it belongs to man, to the poet, the painter, the lover. But
_Cause_, to a few privileged souls and to certain mighty thinkers,
is superior to nature. Cause is God. In the sphere of causes live
the Newtons and all such thinkers as Laplace, Kepler, Descartes,
Malebranche, Spinoza, Buffon; also the true poets and solitarys of
the second Christian century, and the Saint Teresas of Spain, and such
sublime ecstatics. All human sentiments bear analogy to these conditions
whenever the mind abandons Effect for Cause. Thaddeus had reached this
height, at which all things change their relative aspect. Filled with
the joys unutterable of a creator he had attained in his love to all
that genius has revealed to us of grandeur.

“No,” he was thinking to himself as he watched the curling smoke of his
pipe, “she was not entirely deceived. She might break up my friendship
with Adam if she took a dislike to me; but if she coquetted with me to
amuse herself, what would become of me?”

The conceit of this last supposition was so foreign to the modest
nature and Teutonic timidity of the captain that he scolded himself for
admitting it, and went to bed, resolved to await events before deciding
on a course.

The next day Clementine breakfasted very contentedly without Paz, and
without even noticing his disobedience to her orders. It happened to be
her reception day, when the house was thrown open with a splendor that
was semi-royal. She paid no attention to the absence of Comte Paz, on
whom all the burden of these parade days fell.

“Good!” thought he, as he heard the last carriages driving away at two
in the morning; “it was only the caprice or the curiosity of a Parisian
woman that made her want to see me.”

After that the captain went back to his ordinary habits and ways, which
had been somewhat upset by this incident. Diverted by her Parisian
occupations, Clementine appeared to have forgotten Paz. It must not be
thought an easy matter to reign a queen over fickle Paris. Does any one
suppose that fortunes alone are risked in the great game? The winters
are to fashionable women what a campaign once was to the soldiers of the
Empire. What works of art and genius are expended on a gown or a garland
in which to make a sensation! A fragile, delicate creature will wear
her stiff and brilliant harness of flowers and diamonds, silk and steel,
from nine at night till two and often three o’clock in the morning. She
eats little, to attract remark to her slender waist; she satisfied her
hunger with debilitating tea, sugared cakes, ices which heat her, or
slices of heavy pastry. The stomach is made to yield to the orders of
coquetry. The awakening comes too late. A fashionable woman’s whole life
is in contradiction to the laws of nature, and nature is pitiless. She
has no sooner risen than she makes an elaborate morning toilet, and
thinks of the one which she means to wear in the afternoon. The moment
she is dressed she has to receive and make visits, and go to the Bois
either on horseback or in a carriage. She must practise the art of
smiling, and must keep her mind on the stretch to invent new compliments
which shall seem neither common nor far-fetched. All women do not
succeed in this. It is no surprise, therefore, to find a young woman who
entered fashionable society fresh and healthy, faded and worn out at the
end of three years. Six months spent in the country will hardly heal the
wounds of the winter. We hear continually, in these days, of mysterious
ailments,--gastritis, and so forth,--ills unknown to women when they
busied themselves about their households. In the olden time women only
appeared in the world at intervals; now they are always on the scene.
Clementine found she had to struggle for her supremacy. She was cited,
and that alone brought jealousies; and the care and watchfulness exacted
by this contest with her rivals left little time even to love her
husband. Paz might well be forgotten. Nevertheless, in the month of
May, as she drove home from the Bois, just before she left Paris for
Ronquerolles, her uncle’s estate in Burgundy, she noticed Thaddeus,
elegantly dressed, sauntering on one of the side-paths of the
Champs-Elysees, in the seventh heaven of delight at seeing his beautiful
countess in her elegant carriage with its spirited horses and sparkling
liveries,--in short, his beloved family the admired of all.

“There’s the captain,” she said to her husband.

“He’s happy!” said Adam. “This is his delight. He knows there’s no
equipage more elegant than ours, and he is rejoicing to think that some
people envy it. Have you only just noticed him? I see him there nearly
every day.”

“I wonder what he is thinking about now,” said Clementine.

“He is thinking that this winter has cost a good deal, and that it is
time we went to economize with your old uncle Ronquerolles,” replied
Adam.

The countess stopped the carriage near Paz, and bade him take the seat
beside her. Thaddeus grew as red as a cherry.

“I shall poison you,” he said; “I have been smoking.”

“Doesn’t Adam poison me?” she said.

“Yes, but he is Adam,” returned the captain.

“And why can’t Thaddeus have the same privileges?” asked the countess,
smiling.

That divine smile had a power which triumphed over the heroic
resolutions of poor Paz; he looked at Clementine with all the fire of
his soul in his eyes, though, even so, its flame was tempered by the
angelic gratitude of the man whose life was based upon that virtue.
The countess folded her arms in her shawl, lay back pensively on her
cushions, ruffling the feathers of her pretty bonnet, and looked at the
people who passed her. That flash of a great and hitherto resigned soul
reached her sensibilities. What was Adam’s merit in her eyes? It was
natural enough to have courage and generosity. But Thaddeus--surely
Thaddeus possessed, or seemed to possess, some great superiority
over Adam. They were dangerous thoughts which took possession of the
countess’s mind as she again noticed the contrast of the fine presence
that distinguished Thaddeus, and the puny frame in which Adam showed
the degenerating effects of intermarriage among the Polish aristocratic
families. The devil alone knew the thoughts that were in Clementine’s
head, for she sat still, with thoughtful, dreamy eyes, and without
saying a word until they reached home.

“You will dine with us; I shall be angry if you disobey me,” she said as
the carriage turned in. “You are Thaddeus to me, as you are to Adam. I
know your obligations to him, but I also know those we are under to you.
Both generosities are natural--but you are generous every day and all
day. My father dines here to-day, also my uncle Ronquerolles and my aunt
Madame de Serizy. Dress yourself therefore,” she said, taking the hand
he offered to assist her from the carriage.

Thaddeus went to his own room to dress with a joyful heart, though
shaken by an inward dread. He went down at the last moment and behaved
through dinner as he had done on the first occasion, that is, like a
soldier fit only for his duties as a steward. But this time Clementine
was not his dupe; his glance had enlightened her. The Marquis de
Ronquerolles, one of the ablest diplomates after Talleyrand, who had
served with de Marsay during his short ministry, had been informed by
his niece of the real worth and character of Comte Paz, and knew how
modestly he made himself the steward of his friend Laginski.

“And why is this the first time I have the pleasure of seeing Comte
Paz?” asked the marquis.

“Because he is so shy and retiring,” replied Clementine with a look at
Paz telling him to change his behavior.

Alas! that we should have to avow it, at the risk of rendering the
captain less interesting, but Paz, though superior to his friend
Adam, was not a man of parts. His apparent superiority was due to his
misfortunes. In his lonely and poverty-stricken life in Warsaw he had
read and taught himself a good deal; he had compared and meditated. But
the gift of original thought which makes a great man he did not possess,
and it can never be acquired. Paz, great in heart only, approached in
heart to the sublime; but in the sphere of sentiments, being more a man
of action than of thought, he kept his thoughts to himself; and they
only served therefore to eat his heart out. What, after all, is a
thought unexpressed?

After Clementine’s little speech, the Marquis de Ronquerolles and his
sister exchanged a singular glance, embracing their niece, Comte Adam,
and Paz. It was one of those rapid scenes which take place only in
France and Italy,--the two regions of the world (all courts excepted)
where eyes can say everything. To communicate to the eye the full power
of the soul, to give it the value of speech, needs either the pressure
of extreme servitude, or complete liberty. Adam, the Marquis du Rouvre,
and Clementine did not observe this luminous by-play of the old coquette
and the old diplomatist, but Paz, the faithful watchdog, understood
its meaning. It was, we must remark, an affair of two seconds; but to
describe the tempest it roused in the captain’s soul would take far too
much space in this brief history.

“What!” he said to himself, “do the aunt and uncle think I might be
loved? Then my happiness only depends on my own audacity! But Adam--”

Ideal love and desire clashed with gratitude and friendship, all equally
powerful, and, for a moment, love prevailed. The lover would have his
day. Paz became brilliant, he tried to please, he told the story of the
Polish insurrection in noble words, being questioned about it by the
diplomatist. By the end of dinner Paz saw Clementine hanging upon
his lips and regarding him as a hero, forgetting that Adam too, after
sacrificing a third of his vast fortune, had been an exile. At nine
o’clock, after coffee had been served, Madame de Serizy kissed her niece
on the forehead, pressed her hand, and went away, taking Adam with her
and leaving the Marquis de Ronquerolles and the Marquis du Rouvre, who
soon followed. Paz and Clementine were alone together.

“I will leave you now, madame,” said Thaddeus. “You will of course
rejoin them at the Opera?”

“No,” she answered, “I don’t like dancing, and they give an odious
ballet to-night ‘La Revolte au Serail.’”

There was a moment’s silence.

“Two years ago Adam would not have gone to the Opera without me,” said
Clementine, not looking at Paz.

“He loves you madly,” replied Thaddeus.

“Yes, and because he loves me madly he is all the more likely not to
love me to-morrow,” said the countess.

“How inexplicable Parisian women are!” exclaimed Thaddeus. “When they
are loved to madness they want to be loved reasonably: and when they are
loved reasonably they reproach a man for not loving them at all.”

“And they are quite right. Thaddeus,” she went on, smiling, “I know
Adam well; I am not angry with him; he is volatile and above all grand
seigneur. He will always be content to have me as his wife and he will
never oppose any of my tastes, but--”

“Where is the marriage in which there are no ‘buts’?” said Thaddeus,
gently, trying to give another direction to Clementine’s mind.

The least presuming of men might well have had the thought which came
near rendering this poor lover beside himself; it was this: “If I do not
tell her now that I love her I am a fool,” he kept saying to himself.

Neither spoke; and there came between the pair one of those deep
silences that are crowded with thoughts. The countess examined Paz
covertly, and Paz observed her in a mirror. Buried in an armchair like
a man digesting his dinner, the image of a husband or an indifferent
old man, Paz crossed his hands upon his stomach and twirled his thumbs
mechanically, looking stupidly at them.

“Why don’t you tell me something good of Adam?” cried Clementine
suddenly. “Tell me that he is not volatile, you who know him so well.”

The cry was fine.

“Now is the time,” thought poor Paz, “to put an insurmountable barrier
between us. Tell you good of Adam?” he said aloud. “I love him; you
would not believe me; and I am incapable of telling you harm. My
position is very difficult between you.”

Clementine lowered her head and looked down at the tips of his varnished
boots.

“You Northern men have nothing but physical courage,” she said
complainingly; “you have no constancy in your opinions.”

“How will you amuse yourself alone, madame?” said Paz, assuming a
careless air.

“Are not you going to keep me company?”

“Excuse me for leaving you.”

“What do you mean? Where are you going?”

The thought of a heroic falsehood had come into his head.

“I--I am going to the Circus in the Champs Elysees; it opens to-night,
and I can’t miss it.”

“Why not?” said Clementine, questioning him by a look that was
half-anger.

“Must I tell you why?” he said, coloring; “must I confide to you what I
hide from Adam, who thinks my only love is Poland.”

“Ah! a secret in our noble captain?”

“A disgraceful one--which you will perhaps understand, and pity.”

“You, disgraced?”

“Yes, I, Comte Paz; I am madly in love with a girl who travels all over
France with the Bouthor family,--people who have the rival circus to
Franconi; but they play only at fairs. I have made the director at the
Cirque-Olympique engage her.”

“Is she handsome?”

“To my thinking,” said Paz, in a melancholy tone. “Malaga (that’s her
stage name) is strong, active, and supple. Why do I prefer her to all
other women in the world?--well, I can’t tell you. When I look at her,
with her black hair tied with a blue satin ribbon, floating on her bare
and olive-colored shoulders, and when she is dressed in a white tunic
with a gold edge, and a knitted silk bodice that makes her look like a
living Greek statue, and when I see her carrying those flags in her hand
to the sound of martial music, and jumping through the paper hoops which
tear as she goes through, and lighting so gracefully on the galloping
horse to such applause,--no hired clapping,--well, all that moves me.”

“More than a handsome woman in a ballroom?” asked Clementine, with
amazement and curiosity.

“Yes,” answered Paz, in a choking voice. “Such agility, such grace under
constant danger seems to me the height of triumph for a woman. Yes,
madame, Cinti and Malibran, Grisi and Taglioni, Pasta and Ellsler, all
who reign or have reigned on the stage, can’t be compared, to my mind,
with Malaga, who can jump on or off a horse at full gallop, or stand
on the point of one foot and fall easily into the saddle, and knit
stockings, break eggs, and make an omelette with the horse at full
speed, to the admiration of the people,--the real people, peasants and
soldiers. Malaga, madame, is dexterity personified; her little wrist or
her little foot can rid her of three or four men. She is the goddess of
gymnastics.”

“She must be stupid--”

“Oh, no,” said Paz, “I find her as amusing as the heroine of ‘Peveril
of the Peak.’ Thoughtless as a Bohemian, she says everything that comes
into her head; she thinks no more about the future than you do of
the sous you fling to the poor. She says grand things sometimes. You
couldn’t make her believe that an old diplomatist was a handsome young
man, not if you offered her a million of francs. Such love as hers is
perpetual flattery to a man. Her health is positively insolent, and she
has thirty-two oriental pearls in lips of coral. Her muzzle--that’s what
she calls the lower part of her face--has, as Shakespeare expresses
it, the savor of a heifer’s nose. She can make a man unhappy. She likes
handsome men, strong men, Alexanders, gymnasts, clowns. Her trainer, a
horrible brute, used to beat her to make her supple, and graceful, and
intrepid--”

“You are positively intoxicated with Malaga.”

“Oh, she is called Malaga only on the posters,” said Paz, with a piqued
air. “She lives in the rue Saint-Lazare, in a pretty apartment on the
third story, all velvet and silk, like a princess. She has two lives,
her circus life and the life of a pretty woman.”

“Does she love you?”

“She loves me--now you will laugh--solely because I’m a Pole. She saw
an engraving of Poles rushing with Poniatowski into the Elster,--for all
France persists in thinking that the Elster, where it is impossible
to get drowned, is an impetuous flood, in which Poniatowski and his
followers were engulfed. But in the midst of all this I am very unhappy,
madame.”

A tear of rage fell from his eyes and affected the countess.

“You men have such a passion for singularity.”

“And you?” said Thaddeus.

“I know Adam so well that I am certain he could forget me for some
mountebank like your Malaga. Where did you first see her?”

“At Saint-Cloud, last September, on the fete-day. She was at a corner of
a booth covered with flags, where the shows are given. Her comrades,
all in Polish costumes, were making a horrible racket. I watched her
standing there, silent and dumb, and I thought I saw a melancholy
expression in her face; in truth there was enough about her to sadden a
girl of twenty. That touched me.”

The countess was sitting in a delicious attitude, pensive and rather
melancholy.

“Poor, poor Thaddeus!” she exclaimed. Then, with the kindliness of a
true great lady she added, not without a malicious smile, “Well go, go
to your Circus.”

Thaddeus took her hand, kissed it, leaving a hot tear upon it, and went
out.

Having invented this passion for a circus-rider, he bethought him
that he must give it some reality. The only truth in his tale was the
momentary attention he had given to Malaga at Saint-Cloud; and he had
since seen her name on the posters of the Circus, where the clown, for
a tip of five francs, had told him that the girl was a foundling, stolen
perhaps. Thaddeus now went to the Circus and saw her again. For ten
francs one of the grooms (who take the place in circuses of the dressers
at a theatre) informed him that Malaga was named Marguerite Turquet, and
lived on the fifth story of a house in the rue des Fosses-du-Temple.

The following day Paz went to the faubourg du Temple, found the house,
and asked to see Mademoiselle Turquet, who during the summer was
substituting for the leading horsewoman at the Cirque-Olympique, and a
supernumerary at a boulevard theatre in winter.

“Malaga!” cried the portress, rushing into the attic, “there’s a fine
gentleman wanting you. He is getting information from Chapuzot, who is
playing him off to give me time to tell you.”

“Thank you, M’ame Chapuzot; but what will he think of me if he finds me
ironing my gown?”

“Pooh! when a man’s in love he loves everything about us.”

“Is he an Englishman? they are fond of horses.”

“No, he looks to me Spanish.”

“That’s a pity; they say Spaniards are always poor. Stay here with me,
M’ame Chapuzot; I don’t want him to think I’m deserted.”

“Who is it you are looking for, monsieur?” asked Madame Chapuzot,
opening the door for Thaddeus, who had now come upstairs.

“Mademoiselle Turquet.”

“My dear,” said the portress, with an air of importance, “here is some
one to see you.”

A line on which the clothes were drying caught the captain’s hat and
knocked it off.

“What is it you wish, monsieur?” said Malaga, picking up the hat and
giving it to him.

“I saw you at the Circus,” said Thaddeus, “and you reminded me of a
daughter whom I have lost, mademoiselle; and out of affection for my
Heloise, whom you resemble in a most striking manner, I should like to
be of some service to you, if you will permit me.”

“Why, certainly; pray sit down, general,” said Madame Chapuzot; “nothing
could be more straightforward, more gallant.”

“But I am not gallant, my good lady,” exclaimed Paz. “I am an
unfortunate father who tries to deceive himself by a resemblance.”

“Then am I to pass for your daughter?” said Malaga, slyly, and not in
the least suspecting the perfect sincerity of his proposal.

“Yes,” said Paz, “and I’ll come and see you sometimes. But you shall be
lodged in better rooms, comfortably furnished.”

“I shall have furniture!” cried Malaga, looking at Madame Chapuzot.

“And servants,” said Paz, “and all you want.”

Malaga looked at the stranger suspiciously.

“What countryman is monsieur?”

“I am a Pole.”

“Oh! then I accept,” she said.

Paz departed, promising to return.

“Well, that’s a stiff one!” said Marguerite Turquet, looking at Madame
Chapuzot; “I’m half afraid he is wheedling me, to carry out some fancy
of his own--Pooh! I’ll risk it.”

A month after this eccentric interview the circus-rider was living in
a comfortable apartment furnished by Comte Adam’s own upholsterer, Paz
having judged it desirable to have his folly talked about at the hotel
Laginski. Malaga, to whom this adventure was like a leaf out of the
Arabian Nights, was served by Monsieur and Madame Chapuzot in the double
capacity of friends and servants. The Chapuzots and Marguerite were
constantly expecting some result of all this; but at the end of three
months none of them were able to make out the meaning of the Polish
count’s caprice. Paz arrived duly and passed about an hour there once
a week, during which time he sat in the salon, and never went
into Malaga’s boudoir nor into her bedroom, in spite of the clever
manoeuvring of the Chapuzots and Malaga to get him there. The count
would ask questions as to the small events of Marguerite’s life, and
each time that he came he left two gold pieces of forty francs each on
the mantel-piece.

“He looks as if he didn’t care to be here,” said Madame Chapuzot.

“Yes,” said Malaga, “the man’s as cold as an icicle.”

“But he’s a good fellow all the same,” cried Chapuzot, who was happy in
a new suit of clothes made of blue cloth, in which he looked like the
servant of some minister.

The sum which Paz deposited weekly on the mantel-piece, joined to
Malaga’s meagre salary, gave her the means of sumptuous living compared
with her former poverty. Wonderful stories went the rounds of the Circus
about Malaga’s good-luck. Her vanity increased the six thousand francs
which Paz had spent on her furniture to sixty thousand. According to
the clowns and the supers, Malaga was squandering money; and she now
appeared at the Circus wearing burnous and shawls and elegant scarfs.
The Pole, it was agreed on all sides, was the best sort of man a
circus-rider had ever encountered, not fault-finding nor jealous, and
willing to let Malaga do just what she liked.

“Some women have the luck of it,” said Malaga’s rival, “and I’m not one
of them,--though I do draw a third of the receipts.”

Malaga wore pretty things, and occasionally “showed her head” (a term in
the lexicon of such characters) in the Bois, where the fashionable young
men of the day began to remark her. In fact, before long Malaga was
very much talked about in the questionable world of equivocal women, who
presently attacked her good fortune by calumnies. They said she was
a somnambulist, and the Pole was a magnetizer who was using her to
discover the philosopher’s stone. Some even more envenomed scandals
drove her to a curiosity that was greater than Psyche’s. She reported
them in tears to Paz.

“When I want to injure a woman,” she said in conclusion, “I don’t
calumniate her; I don’t declare that some one magnetizes her to get
stones out of her, but I say plainly that she is humpbacked, and I prove
it. Why do you compromise me in this way?”

Paz maintained a cruel silence. Madame Chapuzot was not long in
discovering the name and title of Comte Paz; then she heard certain
positive facts at the hotel Laginski: for instance, that Paz was a
bachelor, and had never been known to have a daughter, alive or dead,
in Poland or in France. After that Malaga could not control a feeling of
terror.

“My dear child,” Madame Chapuzot would say, “that monster--” (a man who
contented himself with only looking, in a sly way,--not daring to come
out and say things,--and such a beautiful creature too, as Malaga,--of
course such a man was a monster, according to Madame Chapuzot’s ideas)
“--that monster is trying to get a hold upon you, and make you do
something illegal and criminal. Holy Father, if you should get into
the police-courts! it makes me tremble from head to foot; suppose they
should put you in the newspapers! I’ll tell you what I should do in your
place; I’d warn the police.”

One particular day, after many foolish notions had fermented for
some time in Malaga’s mind, Paz having laid his money as usual on the
mantel-piece, she seized the bits of gold and flung them in his face,
crying out, “I don’t want stolen money!”

The captain gave the gold to Chapuzot, went away without a word, and did
not return.

Clementine was at this time at her uncle’s place in Burgundy.

When the Circus troop discovered that Malaga had lost her Polish count,
much excitement was produced among them. Malaga’s display of honor was
considered folly by some, and shrewdness by others. The conduct of the
Pole, however, even when discussed by the cleverest of women, seemed
inexplicable. Thaddeus received in the course of the next week
thirty-seven letters from women of their kind. Happily for him, his
astonishing reserve did not excite the curiosity of the fashionable
world, and was only discussed in the demi-mondaine regions.

Two weeks later the handsome circus-rider, crippled by debt, wrote the
following letter to Comte Paz, which, having fallen into the hands
of Comte Adam, was read by several of the dandies of the day, who
pronounced it a masterpiece:--

  “You, whom I still dare to call my friend, will you not pity me
  after all that has passed,--which you have so ill understood? My
  heart disavows whatever may have wounded your feelings. If I was
  fortunate enough to charm you and keep you beside me in the past,
  return to me; otherwise, I shall fall into despair. Poverty has
  overtaken me, and you do not know what _horrid things_ it brings
  with it. Yesterday I lived on a herring at two sous, and one sou
  of bread. Is that a breakfast for the woman you loved? The
  Chapuzots have left me, though they seemed so devoted. Your
  desertion has caused me to see to the bottom of all human
  attachments. The dog we feed does not leave us, but the Chapuzots
  have gone. A sheriff has seized everything on behalf of the
  landlord, who has no heart, and the jeweller, who refused to wait
  even ten days,--for when we lose the confidence of such as you,
  credit goes too. What a position for women who have nothing to
  reproach themselves with but the happiness they have given! My
  friend, I have taken all I have of any value to _my uncle’s_; I have
  nothing but the memory of you left, and here is the winter coming
  on. I shall be fireless when it turns cold; for the boulevards are
  to play only melodramas, in which I have nothing but little bits
  of parts which don’t _pose_ a woman. How could you misunderstand the
  nobleness of my feelings for you?--for there are two ways of
  expressing gratitude. You who seemed so happy in seeing me
  well-off, how can you leave me in poverty? Oh, my sole friend on
  earth, before I go back to the country fairs with Bouthor’s circus,
  where I can at least make a living, forgive me if I wish to know
  whether I have lost you forever. If I were to let myself think of
  you when I jump through the hoops, I should be sure to break my legs
  by losing _a time_. Whatever may be the result, I am yours for life.

“Marguerite Turquet.”


“That letter,” thought Thaddeus, shouting with laughter, “is worth the
ten thousand francs I have spent upon her.”




III


Clementine came home the next day, and the day after that Paz beheld her
again, more beautiful and graceful than ever. After dinner, during which
the countess treated Paz with an air of perfect indifference, a little
scene took place in the salon between the count and his wife when
Thaddeus had left them. On pretence of asking Adam’s advice, Thaddeus
had left Malaga’s letter with him, as if by mistake.

“Poor Thaddeus!” said Adam, as Paz disappeared, “what a misfortune for
a man of his distinction to be the plaything of the lowest kind of
circus-rider. He will lose everything, and get lower and lower, and
won’t be recognizable before long. Here, read that,” added the count,
giving Malaga’s letter to his wife.

Clementine read the letter, which smelt of tobacco, and threw it from
her with a look of disgust.

“Thick as the bandage is over his eyes,” continued Adam, “he must have
found out something; Malaga tricked him, no doubt.”

“But he goes back to her,” said Clementine, “and he will forgive her! It
is for such horrible women as that that you men have indulgence.”

“Well, they need it,” said Adam.

“Thaddeus used to show some decency--in living apart from us,” she
remarked. “He had better go altogether.”

“Oh, my dear angel, that’s going too far,” said the count, who did not
want the death of the sinner.

Paz, who knew Adam thoroughly, had enjoined him to secrecy, pretending
to excuse his dissipations, and had asked his friend to lend him a few
thousand francs for Malaga.

“He is a very firm fellow,” said Adam.

“How so?” asked Clementine.

“Why, for having spent no more than ten thousand francs on her, and
letting her send him that letter before he would ask me for enough to
pay her debts. For a Pole, I call that firm.”

“He will ruin you,” said Clementine, in the sharp tone of a Parisian
woman, when she shows her feline distrusts.

“Oh, I know him,” said Adam; “he will sacrifice Malaga, if I ask him.”

“We shall see,” remarked the countess.

“If it is best for his own happiness, I sha’n’t hesitate to ask him to
leave her. Constantin says that since Paz has been with her he, sober
as he is, has sometimes come home quite excited. If he takes to
intoxication I shall be just as grieved as if he were my own son.”

“Don’t tell me anything more about it,” cried the countess, with a
gesture of disgust.

Two days later the captain perceived in the manner, the tones of voice,
but, above all, in the eyes of the countess, the terrible results of
Adam’s confidences. Contempt had opened a gulf between the beloved woman
and himself. He was suddenly plunged into the deepest distress of mind,
for the thought gnawed him, “I have myself made her despise me!” His own
folly stared him in the face. Life then became a burden to him, the very
sun turned gray. And yet, amid all these bitter thoughts, he found again
some moments of pure joy. There were times when he could give himself
up wholly to his admiration for his mistress, who paid not the
slightest attention to him. Hanging about in corners at her parties
and receptions, silent, all heart and eyes, he never lost one of her
attitudes, nor a tone of her voice when she sang. He lived in her life;
he groomed the horse which _she_ rode, he studied the ways and means of
that splendid establishment, to the interests of which he was now more
devoted than ever. These silent pleasures were buried in his heart like
those of a mother, whose heart a child never knows; for is it knowing
anything unless we know it all? His love was more perfect than the love
of Petrarch for Laura, which found its ultimate reward in the treasures
of fame, the triumph of the poem which she had inspired. Surely the
emotion that the Chevalier d’Assas felt in dying must have been to him
a lifetime of joy. Such emotions as these Paz enjoyed daily,--without
dying, but also without the guerdon of immortality.

But what is Love, that, in spite of all these ineffable delights, Paz
should still have been unhappy? The Catholic religion has so magnified
Love that she has wedded it indissolubly to respect and nobility of
spirit. Love is therefore attended by those sentiments and qualities
of which mankind is proud; it is rare to find true Love existing where
contempt is felt. Thaddeus was suffering from the wounds his own hand
had given him. The trial of his former life, when he lived beside his
mistress, unknown, unappreciated, but generously working for her, was
better than this. Yes, he wanted the reward of his virtue, her respect,
and he had lost it. He grew thin and yellow, and so ill with constant
low fever that during the month of January he was obliged to keep his
bed, though he refused to see a doctor. Comte Adam became very uneasy
about him; but the countess had the cruelty to remark: “Let him alone;
don’t you see it is only some Olympian trouble?” This remark, being
repeated to Thaddeus, gave him the courage of despair; he left his bed,
went out, tried a few amusements, and recovered his health.

About the end of February Adam lost a large sum of money at the
Jockey-Club, and as he was afraid of his wife, he begged Thaddeus to let
the sum appear in the accounts as if he had spent it on Malaga.

“There’s nothing surprising in your spending that sum on the girl;
but if the countess finds out that I have lost it at cards I shall be
lowered in her opinion, and she will always be suspicious in future.”

“Ha! this, too!” exclaimed Thaddeus, with a sigh.

“Now, Thaddeus, if you will do me this service we shall be forever
quits,--though, indeed, I am your debtor now.”

“Adam, you will have children; don’t gamble any more,” said Paz.

“So Malaga has cost us another twenty thousand francs,” cried the
countess, some time later, when she discovered this new generosity to
Paz. “First, ten thousand, now twenty more,--thirty thousand! the income
of which is fifteen hundred! the cost of my box at the Opera, and the
whole fortune of many a bourgeois. Oh, you Poles!” she said, gathering
some flowers in her greenhouse; “you are really incomprehensible. Why
are you not furious with him?”

“Poor Paz is--”

“Poor Paz, poor Paz, indeed!” she cried, interrupting him, “what good
does he do us? I shall take the management of the household myself. You
can give him the allowance he refused, and let him settle it as he likes
with his Circus.”

“He is very useful to us, Clementine. He has certainly saved over forty
thousand francs this last year. And besides, my dear angel, he has
managed to put a hundred thousand with Nucingen, which a steward would
have pocketed.”

Clementine softened down; but she was none the less hard in her feelings
to Thaddeus. A few days later, she requested him to come to that boudoir
where, one year earlier, she had been surprised into comparing him with
her husband. This time she received him alone, without perceiving the
slightest danger in so doing.

“My dear Paz,” she said, with the condescending familiarity of the great
to their inferiors, “if you love Adam as you say you do, you will do
a thing which he will not ask of you, but which I, his wife, do not
hesitate to exact.”

“About Malaga?” said Thaddeus, with bitterness in his heart.

“Well, yes,” she said; “if you wish to end your days in this house
and continue good friends with us, you must give her up. How an old
soldier--”

“I am only thirty-five, and haven’t a white hair.”

“You look old,” she said, “and that’s the same thing. How so careful a
manager, so distinguished a--”

The horrible part of all this was her evident intention to rouse a sense
of honor in his soul which she thought extinct.

“--so distinguished a man as you are, Thaddeus,” she resumed after a
momentary pause which a gesture of his hand had led her to make, “can
allow yourself to be caught like a boy! Your proceedings have made that
woman celebrated. My uncle wanted to see her, and he did see her. My
uncle is not the only one; Malaga receives a great many gentlemen. I did
think you such a noble soul. For shame! Will she be such a loss that you
can’t replace her?”

“Madame, if I knew any sacrifice I could make to recover your esteem I
would make it; but to give up Malaga is not one--”

“In your position, that is what I should say myself, if I were a man,”
 replied Clementine. “Well, if I accept it as a great sacrifice there can
be no ill-will between us.”

Paz left the room, fearing he might commit some great folly, and feeling
that wild ideas were getting the better of him. He went to walk in the
open air, lightly dressed in spite of the cold, but without being able
to cool the fire in his cheeks or on his brow.

“I thought you had a noble soul,”--the words still rang in his ears.

“A year ago,” he said to himself, “she thought me a hero who could fight
the Russians single-handed!”

He thought of leaving the hotel Laginski, and taking service with the
spahis and getting killed in Africa, but the same great fear checked
him. “Without me,” he thought, “what would become of them? they would
soon be ruined. Poor countess! what a horrible life it would be for her
if she were reduced to even thirty thousand francs a year. No, since all
is lost for me in this world,--courage! I will keep on as I am.”

Every one knows that since 1830 the carnival in Paris has undergone a
transformation which has made it European, and far more burlesque
and otherwise lively than the late Carnival of Venice. Is it that the
diminishing fortunes of the present time have led Parisians to invent a
way of amusing themselves collectively, as for instance at their clubs,
where they hold salons without hostesses and without manners, but very
cheaply? However this may be, the month of March was prodigal of balls,
at which dancing, joking, coarse fun, excitement, grotesque figures, and
the sharp satire of Parisian wit, produced extravagant effects. These
carnival follies had their special Pandemonium in the rue Saint-Honore
and their Napoleon in Musard, a small man born expressly to lead an
orchestra as noisy as the disorderly audience, and to set the time for
the galop, that witches’ dance, which was one of Auber’s triumphs, for
it did not really take form or poesy till the grand galop in “Gustave”
 was given to the world. That tremendous finale might serve as the symbol
of an epoch in which for the last fifty years all things have hurried by
with the rapidity of a dream.

Now, it happened that the grave Thaddeus, with one divine and immaculate
image in his heart, proposed to Malaga, the queen of the carnival
dances, to spend an evening at the Musard ball; because he knew the
countess, disguised to the teeth, intended to come there with two
friends, all three accompanied by their husbands, and look on at the
curious spectacle of one of these crowded balls.

On Shrove Tuesday, of the year 1838, at four o’clock in the morning, the
countess, wrapped in a black domino and sitting on the lower step of the
platform in the Babylonian hall, where Valentino has since then given
his concerts, beheld Thaddeus, as Robert Macaire, threading the galop
with Malaga in the dress of a savage, her head garnished with plumes
like the horse of a hearse, and bounding through the crowd like a
will-o-the-wisp.

“Ah!” said Clementine to her husband, “you Poles have no honor at all!
I did believe in Thaddeus. He gave me his word that he would leave that
woman; he did not know that I should be here, seeing all unseen.”

A few days later she requested Paz to dine with them. After dinner Adam
left them alone together, and Clementine reproved Paz and let him know
very plainly that she did not wish him to live in her house any longer.

“Yes, madame,” said Paz, humbly, “you are right; I am a wretch; I did
give you my word. But you see how it is; I put off leaving Malaga till
after the carnival. Besides, that woman exerts an influence over me
which--”

“An influence!--a woman who ought to be turned out of Musard’s by the
police for such dancing!”

“I agree to all that; I accept the condemnation and I’ll leave your
house. But you know Adam. If I give up the management of your property
you must show energy yourself. I may have been to blame about Malaga,
but I have taken the whole charge of your affairs, managed your
servants, and looked after the very least details. I cannot leave you
until I see you prepared to continue my management. You have now
been married three years, and you are safe from the temptations to
extravagance which come with the honeymoon. I see that Parisian
women, and even titled ones, do manage both their fortunes and their
households. Well, as soon as I am certain not so much of your capacity
as of your perseverance I shall leave Paris.”

“It is Thaddeus of Warsaw, and not that Circus Thaddeus who speaks now,”
 said Clementine. “Go, and come back cured.”

“Cured! never,” said Paz, his eyes lowered and fixed on Clementine’s
pretty feet. “You do not know, countess, what charm, what unexpected
piquancy of mind she has.” Then, feeling his courage fail him, he added
hastily, “There is not a woman in society, with her mincing airs, that
is worth the honest nature of that young animal.”

“At any rate, I wish nothing of the animal about me,” said the countess,
with a glance like that of an angry viper.

After that evening Comte Paz showed Clementine the exact state of
her affairs; he made himself her tutor, taught her the methods and
difficulties of the management of property, the proper prices to pay for
things, and how to avoid being cheated by her servants. He told her
she could rely on Constantin and make him her major-domo. Thaddeus had
trained the man thoroughly. By the end of May he thought the countess
fully competent to carry on her affairs alone; for Clementine was one of
those far-sighted women, full of instinct, who have an innate genius as
mistress of a household.

This position of affairs, which Thaddeus had led up to naturally, did
not end without further cruel trials; his sufferings were fated not to
be as sweet and tender as he was trying to make them. The poor lover
forgot to reckon on the hazard of events. Adam fell seriously ill, and
Thaddeus, instead of leaving the house, stayed to nurse his friend. His
devotion was unwearied. A woman who had any interest in employing her
perspicacity might have seen in this devotion a sort of punishment
imposed by a noble soul to repress an involuntary evil thought; but
women see all, or see nothing, according to the condition of their
souls--love is their sole illuminator.

During forty-five days Paz watched and tended Adam without appearing
to think of Malaga, for the very good reason that he never did think of
her. Clementine, feeling that Adam was at the point of death though he
did not die, sent for all the leading doctors of Paris in consultation.

“If he comes safely out of this,” said the most distinguished of them
all, “it will only be by an effort of nature. It is for those who nurse
him to watch for the moment when they must second nature. The count’s
life is in the hands of his nurses.”

Thaddeus went to find Clementine and tell her this result of the
consultation. He found her sitting in the Chinese pavilion, as much for
a little rest as to leave the field to the doctors and not embarrass
them. As he walked along the winding gravelled path which led to the
pavilion, Thaddeus seemed to himself in the depths of an abyss described
by Dante. The unfortunate man had never dreamed that the possibility
might arise of becoming Clementine’s husband, and now he had drowned
himself in a ditch of mud. His face was convulsed, when he reached
the kiosk, with an agony of grief; his head, like Medusa’s, conveyed
despair.

“Is he dead?” said Clementine.

“They have given him up; that is, they leave him to nature. Do not go
in; they are still there, and Bianchon is changing the dressings.”

“Poor Adam! I ask myself if I have not sometimes pained him,” she said.

“You have made him very happy,” said Thaddeus; “you ought to be easy on
that score, for you have shown every indulgence for him.”

“My loss would be irreparable.”

“But, dear, you judged him justly.”

“I was never blind to his faults,” she said, “but I loved him as a wife
should love her husband.”

“Then you ought, in case you lose him,” said Thaddeus, in a voice which
Clementine had never heard him use, “to grieve for him less than if you
lost a man who was your pride, your love, and all your life,--as some
men are to you women. Surely you can be frank at this moment with a
friend like me. I shall grieve, too; long before your marriage I had
made him my child, I had sacrificed my life to him. If he dies I shall
be without an interest on earth; but life is still beautiful to a widow
of twenty-four.”

“Ah! but you know that I love no one,” she said, with the impatience of
grief.

“You don’t yet know what it is to love,” said Thaddeus.

“Oh, as husbands are, I have sense enough to prefer a child like my poor
Adam to a superior man. It is now over a month that we have been saying
to each other, ‘Will he live?’ and these alternations have prepared me,
as they have you, for this loss. I can be frank with you. Well, I would
give my life to save Adam. What is a woman’s independence in Paris?
the freedom to let herself be taken in by ruined or dissipated men who
pretend to love her. I pray to God to leave me this husband who is so
kind, so obliging, so little fault-finding, and who is beginning to
stand in awe of me.”

“You are honest, and I love you the better for it,” said Thaddeus,
taking her hand which she yielded to him, and kissing it. “In solemn
moments like these there is unspeakable satisfaction in finding a woman
without hypocrisy. It is possible to converse with you. Let us look to
the future. Suppose that God does not grant your prayer,--and no one
cries to him more than I do, ‘Leave me my friend!’ Yes, these fifty
nights have not weakened me; if thirty more days and nights are needed
I can give them while you sleep,--yes, I will tear him from death if, as
the doctors say, nursing can save him. But suppose that in spite of you
and me, the count dies,--well, then, if you were loved, oh, adored, by a
man of a heart and soul that are worthy of you--”

“I may have wished for such love, foolishly, but I have never met with
it.”

“Perhaps you are mistaken--”

Clementine looked fixedly at Thaddeus, imagining that there was less of
love than of cupidity in his thoughts; her eyes measured him from head
to foot and poured contempt upon him; then she crushed him with the
words, “Poor Malaga!” uttered in tones which a great lady alone can
find to give expression to her disdain. She rose, leaving Thaddeus half
unconscious behind her, slowly re-entered her boudoir, and went back to
Adam’s chamber.

An hour later Paz returned to the sick-room, and began anew, with death
in his heart, his care of the count. From that moment he said nothing.
He was forced to struggle with the patient, whom he managed in a way
that excited the admiration of the doctors. At all hours his watchful
eyes were like lamps always lighted. He showed no resentment to
Clementine, and listened to her thanks without accepting them; he seemed
both dumb and deaf. To himself he was saying, “She shall owe his life to
me,” and he wrote the thought as it were in letters of fire on the walls
of Adam’s room. On the fifteenth day Clementine was forced to give up
the nursing, lest she should utterly break down. Paz was unwearied. At
last, towards the end of August, Bianchon, the family physician, told
Clementine that Adam was out of danger.

“Ah, madame, you are under no obligation to me,” he said; “without his
friend, Comte Paz, we could not have saved him.”

The day after the meeting of Paz and Clementine in the kiosk, the
Marquis de Ronquerolles came to see his nephew. He was on the eve of
starting for Russia on a secret diplomatic mission. Paz took occasion
to say a few words to him. The first day that Adam was able to drive
out with his wife and Thaddeus, a gentleman entered the courtyard as the
carriage was about to leave it, and asked for Comte Paz. Thaddeus, who
was sitting on the front seat of the caleche, turned to take a letter
which bore the stamp of the ministry of Foreign affairs. Having read it,
he put it into his pocket in a manner which prevented Clementine or Adam
from speaking of it. Nevertheless, by the time they reached the porte
Maillot, Adam, full of curiosity, used the privilege of a sick man
whose caprices are to be gratified, and said to Thaddeus: “There’s no
indiscretion between brothers who love each other,--tell me what there
is in that despatch; I’m in a fever of curiosity.”

Clementine glanced at Thaddeus with a vexed air, and remarked to her
husband: “He has been so sulky with me for the last two months that I
shall never ask him anything again.”

“Oh, as for that,” replied Paz, “I can’t keep it out of the newspapers,
so I may as well tell you at once. The Emperor Nicholas has had the
grace to appoint me captain in a regiment which is to take part in the
expedition to Khiva.”

“You are not going?” cried Adam.

“Yes, I shall go, my dear fellow. Captain I came, and captain I return.
We shall dine together to-morrow for the last time. If I don’t start at
once for St. Petersburg I shall have to make the journey by land, and I
am not rich, and I must leave Malaga a little independence. I ought to
think of the only woman who has been able to understand me; she thinks
me grand, superior. I dare say she is faithless, but she would jump--”

“Through the hoop, for your sake and come down safely on the back of her
horse,” said Clementine sharply.

“Oh, you don’t know Malaga,” said the captain, bitterly, with a
sarcastic look in his eyes which made Clementine thoughtful and uneasy.

“Good-by to the young trees of this beautiful Bois, which you Parisians
love, and the exiles who find a home here love too,” he said,
presently. “My eyes will never again see the evergreens of the avenue de
Mademoiselle, nor the acacias nor the cedars of the rond-points. On
the borders of Asia, fighting for the Emperor, promoted to the command,
perhaps, by force of courage and by risking my life, it may happen that
I shall regret these Champs-Elysees where I have driven beside you, and
where you pass. Yes, I shall grieve for Malaga’s hardness--the Malaga of
whom I am now speaking.”

This was said in a manner that made Clementine tremble.

“Then you do love Malaga very much?” she asked.

“I have sacrificed for her the honor that no man should ever sacrifice.”

“What honor?”

“That which we desire to keep at any cost in the eyes of our idol.”

After that reply Thaddeus said no more; he was silent until, as they
passed a wooden building on the Champs Elysees, he said, pointing to it,
“That is the Circus.”

He went to the Russian Embassy before dinner, and thence to the Foreign
office, and the next morning he had started for Havre before the count
and countess were up.

“I have lost a friend,” said Adam, with tears in his eyes, when he heard
that Paz had gone,--“a friend in the true meaning of the word. I don’t
know what has made him abandon me as if a pestilence were in my house.
We are not friends to quarrel about a woman,” he said, looking intently
at Clementine. “You heard what he said yesterday about Malaga. Well, he
has never so much as touched the little finger of that girl.”

“How do you know that?” said Clementine.

“I had the natural curiosity to go and see Mademoiselle Turquet, and
the poor girl can’t explain even to herself the absolute reserve which
Thad--”

“Enough!” said the countess, retreating into her bedroom. “Can it be
that I am the victim of some noble mystification?” she asked herself.
The thought had hardly crossed her mind when Constantin brought her the
following letter written by Thaddeus during the night:--

  “Countess,--To seek death in the Caucasus and carry with me your
  contempt is more than I can bear. A man should die untainted. When
  I saw you for the first time I loved you as we love a woman whom
  we shall love forever, even though she be unfaithful to us. I
  loved you thus,--I, the friend of the man you had chosen and were
  about to marry; I, poor; I, the steward,--a voluntary service, but
  still the steward of your household.

  “In this immense misfortune I found a happy life. To be to you an
  indispensable machine, to know myself useful to your comfort, your
  luxury, has been the source of deep enjoyments. If these
  enjoyments were great when I thought only of Adam, think what they
  were to my soul when the woman I loved was the mainspring of all I
  did. I have known the pleasures of maternity in my love. I
  accepted life thus. Like the paupers who live along the great
  highways, I built myself a hut on the borders of your beautiful
  domain, though I never sought to approach you. Poor and lonely,
  struck blind by Adam’s good fortune, I was, nevertheless, the
  giver. Yes, you were surrounded by a love as pure as a
  guardian-angel’s; it waked while you slept; it caressed you with a
  look as you passed; it was happy in its own existence,--you were
  the sun of my native land to me, poor exile, who now writes to you
  with tears in his eyes as he thinks of the happiness of those first
  days.

  “When I was eighteen years old, having no one to love, I took for
  my ideal mistress a charming woman in Warsaw, to whom I confided
  all my thoughts, my wishes; I made her the queen of my nights and
  days. She knew nothing of all this; why should she? I loved my
  love.

  “You can fancy from this incident of my youth how happy I was
  merely to live in the sphere of your existence, to groom your
  horse, to find the new-coined gold for your purse, to prepare the
  splendor of your dinners and your balls, to see you eclipsing the
  elegance of those whose fortunes were greater than yours, and all
  by my own good management. Ah! with what ardor I have ransacked
  Paris when Adam would say to me, ‘_She_ wants this or that.’ It was
  a joy such as I can never express to you. You wished for a trifle
  at one time which kept me seven hours in a cab scouring the city;
  and what delight it was to weary myself for you. Ah! when I saw
  you, unseen by you, smiling among your flowers, I could forget
  that no one loved me. On certain days, when my happiness turned my
  head, I went at night and kissed the spot where, to me, your feet
  had left their luminous traces. The air you had breathed was
  balmy; in it I breathed in more of life; I inhaled, as they say
  persons do in the tropics, a vapor laden with creative principles.

  “I _must_ tell you these things to explain the strange presumption
  of my involuntary thoughts,--I would have died rather than avow it
  until now.

  “You will remember those few days of curiosity when you wished to
  know the man who performed the household miracles you had
  sometimes noticed. I thought,--forgive me, madame,--I believed you
  might love me. Your good-will, your glances interpreted by me, a
  lover, seemed to me so dangerous--for me--that I invented that
  story of Malaga, knowing it was the sort of liaison which women
  cannot forgive. I did it in a moment when I felt that my love
  would be communicated, fatally, to you. Despise me, crush me with
  the contempt you have so often cast upon me when I did not deserve
  it; and yet I am certain that, if, on that evening when your aunt
  took Adam away from you, I had said what I have now written to
  you, I should, like the tamed tiger that sets his teeth once more
  in living flesh, and scents the blood, and--

                                                          “Midnight.”

  “I could not go on; the memory of that hour is still too living.
  Yes, I was maddened. Was there hope for me in your eyes? then
  victory with its scarlet banners would have flamed in mine and
  fascinated yours. My crime has been to think all this; perhaps
  wrongly. You alone can judge of that dreadful scene when I drove
  back love, desire, all the most invincible forces of our manhood,
  with the cold hand of gratitude,--gratitude which must be eternal.

  “Your terrible contempt has been my punishment. You have shown me
  there is no return from loathing or disdain. I love you madly. I
  should have gone had Adam died; all the more must I go because he
  lives. A man does not tear his friend from the arms of death to
  betray him. Besides, my going is my punishment for the thought
  that came to me that I would let him die, when the doctors said
  that his life depended on his nursing.

  “Adieu, madame; in leaving Paris I lose all, but you lose nothing
  now in my being no longer near you.

  “Your devoted

  “Thaddeus Paz.”


“If my poor Adam says he has lost a friend, what have I lost?” thought
Clementine, sinking into a chair with her eyes fixed on the carpet.

The following letter Constantin had orders to give privately to the
count:--

  “My dear Adam,--Malaga has told me all. In the name of all your
  future happiness, never let a word escape you to Clementine about
  your visits to that girl; let her think that Malaga has cost me a
  hundred thousand francs. I know Clementine’s character; she will
  never forgive you either your losses at cards or your visits to
  Malaga.

  “I am not going to Khiva, but to the Caucasus. I have the spleen;
  and at the pace at which I mean to go I shall be either Prince
  Paz in three years, or dead. Good-by; though I have taken
  sixty-thousand francs from Nucingen, our accounts are even.

“Thaddeus.”


“Idiot that I was,” thought Adam; “I came near to cutting my throat just
now, talking about Malaga.”

It is now three years since Paz went away. The newspapers have as yet
said nothing about any Prince Paz. The Comtesse Laginska is immensely
interested in the expeditions of the Emperor Nicholas; she is Russian to
the core, and reads with a sort of avidity all the news that comes from
that distant land. Once or twice every winter she says to the Russian
ambassador, with an air of indifference, “Do you know what has become of
our poor Comte Paz?”

Alas! most Parisian women, those beings who think themselves so clever
and clear-sighted, pass and repass beside a Paz and never recognize
him. Yes, many a Paz is unknown and misconceived, but--horrible to think
of!--some are misconceived even though they are loved. The simplest
women in society exact a certain amount of conventional sham from
the greatest men. A noble love signifies nothing to them if rough and
unpolished; it needs the cutting and setting of a jeweller to give it
value in their eyes.

In January, 1842, the Comtesse Laginska, with her charm of gentle
melancholy, inspired a violent passion in the Comte de La Palferine, one
of the most daring and presumptuous lions of the day. La Palferine was
well aware that the conquest of a woman so guarded by reserve as the
Comtesse Laginska was difficult, but he thought he could inveigle this
charming creature into committing herself if he took her unawares, by
the assistance of a certain friend of her own, a woman already jealous
of her.

Quite incapable, in spite of her intelligence, of suspecting such
treachery, the Comtesse Laginska committed the imprudence of going with
her so-called friend to a masked ball at the Opera. About three in the
morning, led away by the excitement of the scene, Clementine, on whom La
Palferine had expended his seductions, consented to accept a supper,
and was about to enter the carriage of her faithless friend. At this
critical moment her arm was grasped by a powerful hand, and she was
taken, in spite of her struggles, to her own carriage, the door of which
stood open, though she did not know it was there.

“He has never left Paris!” she exclaimed to herself as she recognized
Thaddeus, who disappeared when the carriage drove away.

Did any woman ever have a like romance in her life? Clementine is
constantly hoping she may again see Paz.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Bianchon, Horace
       Father Goriot
       The Atheist’s Mass
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Commission in Lunacy
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       The Secrets of a Princess
       The Government Clerks
       Pierrette
       A Study of Woman
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Honorine
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Magic Skin
       A Second Home
       A Prince of Bohemia
       Letters of Two Brides
       The Muse of the Department
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Betty
       The Country Parson
     In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:
       Another Study of Woman
       La Grande Breteche

     Laginski, Comte Adam Mitgislas
       Another Study of Woman
       Cousin Betty

     La Palferine, Comte de
       A Prince of Bohemia
       A Man of Business
       Cousin Betty
       Beatrix

     Lelewel
       The Seamy Side of History

     Nathan, Madame Raoul
       The Muse of the Department
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Government Clerks
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Ursule Mirouet
       Eugenie Grandet
       A Prince of Bohemia
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Paz, Thaddee
       Cousin Betty

     Ronquerolles, Marquis de
       The Peasantry
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Woman of Thirty
       Another Study of Woman
       The Thirteen
       The Member for Arcis

     Rouvre, Marquis du
       A Start in Life
       Ursule Mirouet

     Rouvre, Chevalier du
       Ursule Mirouet

     Schinner, Hippolyte
       The Purse
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Pierre Grassou
       A Start in Life
       Albert Savarus
       The Government Clerks
       Modeste Mignon
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Serizy, Comtesse de
       A Start in Life
       The Thirteen
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Woman of Thirty
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Another Study of Woman

     Serizy, Vicomte de
       A Start in Life
       Modeste Mignon

     Souchet, Francois
       The Purse
       A Daughter of Eve

     Steinbock, Count Wenceslas
       Cousin Betty

     Turquet, Marguerite
       The Muse of the Department
       A Man of Business
       Cousin Betty





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Paz, by Honore de Balzac

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAZ ***

***** This file should be named 1369-0.txt or 1369-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/6/1369/

Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
