The Recruit~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Recruit, by Honore de Balzac

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Recruit

Author: Honore de Balzac

Translator: Katharine Prescott Wormeley

Release Date: August, 1998  [Etext #1426]
Posting Date: February 24, 2010

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RECRUIT ***




Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny





THE RECRUIT


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley




                             DEDICATION

            To my dear Albert Marchand de la Ribellerie.





THE RECRUIT


  At times they saw him, by a phenomenon of vision or locomotion,
  abolish space in its two forms of Time and Distance; the former
  being intellectual space, the other physical space.

                           Intellectual History of Louis Lambert.



On an evening in the month of November, 1793, the principal persons of
Carentan were assembled in the salon of Madame de Dey, where they met
daily. Several circumstances which would never have attracted attention
in a large town, though they greatly preoccupied the little one, gave
to this habitual rendezvous an unusual interest. For the two preceding
evenings Madame de Dey had closed her doors to the little company, on
the ground that she was ill. Such an event would, in ordinary times,
have produced as much effect as the closing of the theatres in Paris;
life under those circumstances seems merely incomplete. But in 1793,
Madame de Dey's action was likely to have fatal results. The slightest
departure from a usual custom became, almost invariably for the nobles,
a matter of life or death. To fully understand the eager curiosity
and searching inquiry which animated on this occasion the Norman
countenances of all these rejected visitors, but more especially to
enter into Madame de Dey's secret anxieties, it is necessary to explain
the role she played at Carentan. The critical position in which she
stood at this moment being that of many others during the Revolution the
sympathies and recollections of more than one reader will help to give
color to this narrative.

Madame de Dey, widow of a lieutenant-general, chevalier of the Orders,
had left the court at the time of the emigration. Possessing a good deal
of property in the neighborhood of Carentan, she took refuge in that
town, hoping that the influence of the Terror would be little felt
there. This expectation, based on a knowledge of the region, was
well-founded. The Revolution committed but few ravages in Lower
Normandy. Though Madame de Dey had known none but the nobles of her own
caste when she visited her property in former years, she now felt it
advisable to open her house to the principle bourgeois of the town,
and to the new governmental authorities; trying to make them pleased
at obtaining her society, without arousing either hatred or jealousy.
Gracious and kind, gifted by nature with that inexpressible charm
which can please without having recourse to subserviency or to making
overtures, she succeeded in winning general esteem by an exquisite tact;
the sensitive warnings of which enabled her to follow the delicate
line along which she might satisfy the exactions of this mixed society,
without humiliating the touchy pride of the parvenus, or shocking that
of her own friends.

Then about thirty-eight years of age, she still preserved, not the fresh
plump beauty which distinguishes the daughters of Lower Normandy, but
a fragile and, so to speak, aristocratic beauty. Her features were
delicate and refined, her figure supple and easy. When she spoke, her
pale face lighted and seemed to acquire fresh life. Her large dark eyes
were full of affability and kindness, and yet their calm, religious
expression seemed to say that the springs of her existence were no
longer in her.

Married in the flower of her age to an old and jealous soldier,
the falseness of her position in the midst of a court noted for its
gallantry contributed much, no doubt, to draw a veil of melancholy over
a face where the charms and the vivacity of love must have shone in
earlier days. Obliged to repress the naive impulses and emotions of
a woman when she simply feels them instead of reflecting about them,
passion was still virgin in the depths of her heart. Her principal
attraction came, in fact, from this innate youth, which sometimes,
however, played her false, and gave to her ideas an innocent expression
of desire. Her manner and appearance commanded respect, but there was
always in her bearing, in her voice, a sort of looking forward to some
unknown future, as in girlhood. The most insensible man would find
himself in love with her, and yet be restrained by a sort of respectful
fear, inspired by her courtly and polished manners. Her soul, naturally
noble, but strengthened by cruel trials, was far indeed from the common
run, and men did justice to it. Such a soul necessarily required a lofty
passion; and the affections of Madame de Dey were concentrated on a
single sentiment,--that of motherhood. The happiness and pleasure of
which her married life was deprived, she found in the passionate love
she bore her son. She loved him not only with the pure and deep devotion
of a mother, but with the coquetry of a mistress, and the jealousy of
a wife. She was miserable away from him, uneasy at his absence, could
never see him enough, and loved only through him and for him. To make
men understand the strength of this feeling, it suffices to add that
the son was not only the sole child of Madame de Dey, but also her last
relation, the only being in the world to whom the fears and hopes and
joys of her life could be naturally attached.

The late Comte de Dey was the last surviving scion of his family,
and she herself was the sole heiress of her own. Human interests and
projects combined, therefore, with the noblest deeds of the soul to
exalt in this mother's heart a sentiment that is always so strong in the
hearts of women. She had brought up this son with the utmost difficulty,
and with infinite pains, which rendered the youth still dearer to her;
a score of times the doctors had predicted his death, but, confident in
her own presentiments, her own unfailing hope, she had the happiness
of seeing him come safely through the perils of childhood, with a
constitution that was ever improving, in spite of the warnings of the
Faculty.

Thanks to her constant care, this son had grown and developed so much,
and so gracefully, that at twenty years of age, he was thought a most
elegant cavalier at Versailles. Madame de Dey possessed a happiness
which does not always crown the efforts and struggles of a mother.
Her son adored her; their souls understood each other with fraternal
sympathy. If they had not been bound by nature's ties, they would
instinctively have felt for each other that friendship of man to man,
which is so rarely to be met in this life. Appointed sub-lieutenant of
dragoons, at the age of eighteen, the young Comte de Dey had obeyed the
point of honor of the period by following the princes of the blood in
their emigration.

Thus Madame de Dey, noble, rich, and the mother of an emigre, could not
be unaware of the dangers of her cruel situation. Having no other desire
than to preserve a fortune for her son, she renounced the happiness of
emigrating with him; and when she read the vigorous laws by virtue
of which the Republic daily confiscated the property of emigres, she
congratulated herself on that act of courage; was she not guarding the
property of her son at the peril of her life? And when she heard of
the terrible executions ordered by the Convention, she slept in peace,
knowing that her sole treasure was in safety, far from danger, far from
scaffolds. She took pleasure in believing that they had each chosen the
wisest course, a course which would save to _him_ both life and fortune.

With this secret comfort in her mind, she was ready to make all the
concessions required by those evil days, and without sacrificing either
her dignity as a woman, or her aristocratic beliefs, she conciliated
the good-will of those about her. Madame de Dey had fully understood the
difficulties that awaited her on coming to Carentan. To seek to occupy
a leading position would be daily defiance to the scaffold; yet she
pursued her even way. Sustained by her motherly courage, she won the
affections of the poor by comforting indiscriminately all miseries, and
she made herself necessary to the rich by assisting their pleasures.
She received the procureur of the commune, the mayor, the judge of
the district court, the public prosecutor, and even the judges of the
revolutionary tribunal.

The first four of these personages, being bachelors, courted her with
the hope of marriage, furthering their cause by either letting her see
the evils they could do her, or those from which they could protect her.
The public prosecutor, previously an attorney at Caen, and the manager
of the countess's affairs, tried to inspire her with love by an
appearance of generosity and devotion; a dangerous attempt for her. He
was the most to be feared among her suitors. He alone knew the exact
condition of the property of his former client. His passion was
increased by cupidity, and his cause was backed by enormous power, the
power of life and death throughout the district. This man, still young,
showed so much apparent nobleness and generosity in his proceedings that
Madame de Dey had not yet been able to judge him. But, disregarding the
danger that attends all attempts at subtilty with Normans, she employed
the inventive wit and slyness which Nature grants to women in opposing
the four rivals one against the other. By thus gaining time, she hoped
to come safe and sound to the end of the national troubles. At this
period, the royalists in the interior of France expected day by day that
the Revolution would be ended on the morrow. This conviction was the
ruin of very many of them.

In spite of these difficulties, the countess had maintained her
independence very cleverly until the day when, by an inexplicable
imprudence, she closed her doors to her usual evening visitors. Madame
de Dey inspired so genuine and deep an interest, that the persons who
called upon her that evening expressed extreme anxiety on being told
that she was unable to receive them. Then, with that frank curiosity
which appears in provincial manners, they inquired what misfortune,
grief, or illness afflicted her. In reply to these questions, an old
housekeeper named Brigitte informed them that her mistress had shut
herself up in her room and would see no one, not even the servants of
the house. The semi-cloistral existence of the inhabitants of a little
town creates so invincible a habit of analyzing and explaining the
actions of their neighbors, that after compassionating Madame de Dey
(without knowing whether she were happy or unhappy), they proceeded to
search for the reasons of this sudden retreat.

"If she were ill," said the first Inquisitive, "she would have sent for
the doctor; but the doctor has been all day long playing chess with me.
He told me, laughing, that in these days there was but one malady, and
that was incurable."

This joke was cautiously uttered. Men, women, old men, and young girls,
all set to work to explore the vast field of conjecture. The next day,
conjectures became suspicions. As life is all aboveboard in a little
town, the women were the first to learn that Brigitte had made larger
purchases than usual in the market. This fact could not be disputed:
Brigitte had been seen there, very early in the morning; and,
extraordinary event! she had bought the only hare the market afforded.
Now all the town knew that Madame de Dey did not like game. The
hare became, therefore, the point of departure for a vast array of
suspicions. The old men who were taking their walks abroad, remarked a
sort of concentrated activity about Madame de Dey's premises, shown by
the very precautions which the servants took to conceal it. The foot-man
was beating a carpet in the garden. The day before, no one would have
noticed that fact; but the carpet now became a corner-stone on which
the whole town built up its theories. Each individual had his or her
surmise.

The second day, on learning that Madame de Dey declared herself ill, the
principal personages of Carentan, assembled in the evening at the
house of the mayor's brother, an old married merchant, a man of strict
integrity, greatly respected, and for whom Madame de Dey had shown much
esteem. There all the aspirants for the hand of the rich widow had a
tale to tell that was more or less probable; and each expected to turn
to his own profit the secret event which he thus recounted. The public
prosecutor imagined a whole drama to result in the return by night of
Madame de Dey's son, the emigre. The mayor was convinced that a priest
who refused the oath had arrived from La Vendee and asked for asylum;
but the day being Friday, the purchase of a hare embarrassed the good
mayor not a little. The judge of the district court held firmly to the
theory of a Chouan leader or a body of Vendeans hotly pursued. Others
were convinced that the person thus harbored was a noble escaped from
the Paris prisons. In short, they all suspected the countess of being
guilty of one of those generosities, which the laws of the day called
crimes, and punished on the scaffold. The public prosecutor remarked in
a low voice that it would be best to say no more, but to do their best
to save the poor woman from the abyss toward which she was hurrying.

"If you talk about this affair," he said, "I shall be obliged to take
notice of it, and search her house, and _then_--"

He said no more, but all present understood what he meant.

The sincere friends of Madame de Dey were so alarmed about her, that on
the morning of the third day, the procureur-syndic of the commune made
his wife write her a letter, urging her to receive her visitors as usual
that evening. Bolder still, the old merchant went himself in the morning
to Madame de Dey's house, and, strong in the service he wanted to render
her, he insisted on seeing her, and was amazed to find her in the garden
gathering flowers for her vases.

"She must be protecting a lover," thought the old man, filled with
sudden pity for the charming woman.

The singular expression on the countess's face strengthened this
conjecture. Much moved at the thought of such devotion, for all men are
flattered by the sacrifices a woman makes for one of them, the old man
told the countess of the rumors that were floating about the town, and
the dangers to which she was exposing herself.

"For," he said in conclusion, "though some of the authorities will
readily pardon a heroism which protects a priest, none of them will
spare you if they discover that you are sacrificing yourself to the
interests of your heart."

At these words Madame de Dey looked at the old man with a wild and
bewildered air, that made him shudder.

"Come," she said, taking him by the hand and leading him into her
bedroom. After assuring herself that they were quite alone, she drew
from her bosom a soiled and crumpled letter.

"Read that," she said, making a violent effort to say the words.

She fell into a chair, seemingly exhausted. While the old man searched
for his spectacles and rubbed their glasses, she raised her eyes to
him, and seemed to study him with curiosity; then she said in an altered
voice, and very softly,--

"I trust you."

"I am here to share your crime," replied the good man, simply.

She quivered. For the first time in that little town, her soul
sympathized with that of another. The old man now understood both the
hopes and the fears of the poor woman. The letter was from her son. He
had returned to France to share in Granville's expedition, and was taken
prisoner. The letter was written from his cell, but it told her to hope.
He did not doubt his means of escape, and he named to her three days, on
one of which he expected to be with her in disguise. But in case he
did not reach Carentan by the third day, she might know some fatal
difficulty had occurred, and the letter contained his last wishes and a
sad farewell. The paper trembled in the old man's hand.

"This is the third day," cried the countess, rising and walking
hurriedly up and down.

"You have been very imprudent," said the merchant. "Why send Brigitte to
buy those provisions?"

"But he may arrive half-dead with hunger, exhausted, and--"

She could say no more.

"I am sure of my brother the mayor," said the old man. "I will see him
at once, and put him in your interests."

After talking with the mayor, the shrewd old man made visits on various
pretexts to the principal families of Carentan, to all of whom he
mentioned that Madame de Dey, in spite of her illness, would receive her
friends that evening. Matching his own craft against those wily Norman
minds, he replied to the questions put to him on the nature of Madame de
Dey's illness in a manner that hoodwinked the community. He related to a
gouty old dame, that Madame de Dey had almost died of a sudden attack of
gout in the stomach, but had been relieved by a remedy which the famous
doctor, Tronchin, had once recommended to her,--namely, to apply the
skin of a freshly-flayed hare on the pit of the stomach, and to remain
in bed without making the slightest movement for two days. This tale had
prodigious success, and the doctor of Carentan, a royalist "in petto,"
increased its effect by the manner in which he discussed the remedy.

Nevertheless, suspicions had taken too strong a root in the minds of
some obstinate persons, and a few philosophers, to be thus dispelled;
so that all Madame de Dey's usual visitors came eagerly and early that
evening to watch her countenance: some out of true friendship, but most
of them to detect the secret of her seclusion.

They found the countess seated as usual, at the corner of the great
fireplace in her salon, a room almost as unpretentious as the other
salons in Carentan; for, in order not to wound the narrow view of her
guests, she denied herself the luxuries to which she was accustomed.
The floor of her reception room was not even waxed, the walls were
still hung with dingy tapestries; she used the country furniture,
burned tallow candles, and followed the customs of the town,--adopting
provincial life, and not shrinking from its pettiness or its many
disagreeable privations. Knowing, however, that her guests would pardon
luxuries if provided for their own comfort, she neglected nothing which
conduced to their personal enjoyment, and gave them, more especially,
excellent dinners.

Toward seven o'clock on this memorable evening, her guests were all
assembled in a wide circle around the fireplace. The mistress of the
house, sustained in her part by the sympathizing glances of the old
merchant, submitted with wonderful courage to the minute questioning and
stupid, or frivolous, comments of her visitors. At every rap upon her
door, every footfall echoing in the street, she hid her emotions by
starting topics relating to the interests of the town, and she raised
such a lively discussion on the quality of ciders, which was ably
seconded by the old merchant, that the company almost forgot to
watch her, finding her countenance quite natural, and her composure
imperturbable. The public prosecutor and one of the judges of the
revolutionary tribunal was taciturn, observing attentively every change
in her face; every now and then they addressed her some embarrassing
question, to which, however, the countess answered with admirable
presence of mind. Mothers have such courage!

After Madame de Dey had arranged the card parties, placing some guests
at the boston, and some at the whist tables, she stood talking to a
number of young people with extreme ease and liveliness of manner,
playing her part like a consummate actress. Presently she suggested a
game of loto, and offered to find the box, on the ground that she alone
knew where it was, and then she disappeared.

"I am suffocating, my poor Brigitte," she cried, wiping the tears that
gushed from her eyes, now brilliant with fever, anxiety, and impatience.
"He does not come," she moaned, looking round the room prepared for her
son. "Here alone I can breathe, I can live! A few minutes more and he
_must_ be here; for I know he is living. I am certain of it, my heart
says so. Don't you hear something, Brigitte? I would give the rest of my
life to know at this moment whether he were still in prison, or out in
the free country. Oh! I wish I could stop thinking--"

She again examined the room to see if all were in order. A good fire
burned on the hearth, the shutters were carefully closed, the furniture
shone with rubbing; even the manner in which the bed was made showed
that the countess had assisted Brigitte in every detail; her hopes were
uttered in the delicate care given to that room where she expected to
fold her son in her arms. A mother alone could have thought of all his
wants; a choice repast, rare wine, fresh linen, slippers, in short,
everything the tired man would need,--all were there that nothing might
be lacking; the comforts of his home should reveal to him without words
the tenderness of his mother!

"Brigitte!" said the countess, in a heart-rending tone, placing a chair
before the table, as if to give a semblance of reality to her hopes, and
so increase the strength of her illusions.

"Ah! madame, he will come. He is not far off. I haven't a doubt he is
living, and on his way," replied Brigitte. "I put a key in the Bible,
and I held it on my fingers while Cottin read a chapter in the gospel of
Saint John; and, madame, the key never turned at all!"

"Is that a good sign?" asked the countess.

"Oh! madame, that's a well-known sign. I would wager my salvation, he
still lives. God would not so deceive us."

"Ah! if he would only come--no matter for his danger here."

"Poor Monsieur Auguste!" cried Brigitte, "he must be toiling along the
roads on foot."

"There's eight o'clock striking now," cried the countess, in terror.

She dared not stay away any longer from her guests; but before
re-entering the salon, she paused a moment under the peristyle of the
staircase, listening if any sound were breaking the silence of the
street. She smiled at Brigitte's husband, who was standing sentinel
at the door, and whose eyes seemed stupefied by the intensity of his
attention to the murmurs of the street and night.

Madame de Dey re-entered her salon, affecting gaiety, and began to play
loto with the young people; but after a while she complained of feeling
ill, and returned to her chimney-corner.

Such was the situation of affairs, and of people's minds in the house
of Madame de Dey, while along the road, between Paris and Cherbourg, a
young man in a brown jacket, called a "carmagnole," worn de rigueur at
that period, was making his way to Carentan. When drafts for the
army were first instituted, there was little or no discipline. The
requirements of the moment did not allow the Republic to equip its
soldiers immediately, and it was not an unusual thing to see the roads
covered with recruits, who were still wearing citizen's dress. These
young men either preceded or lagged behind their respective battalions,
according to their power of enduring the fatigues of a long march.

The young man of whom we are now speaking, was much in advance of a
column of recruits, known to be on its way from Cherbourg, which the
mayor of Carentan was awaiting hourly, in order to give them their
billets for the night. The young man walked with a jades step, but
firmly, and his gait seemed to show that he had long been familiar with
military hardships. Though the moon was shining on the meadows about
Carentan, he had noticed heavy clouds on the horizon, and the fear of
being overtaken by a tempest may have hurried his steps, which were
certainly more brisk than his evident lassitude could have desired.
On his back was an almost empty bag, and he held in his hand a boxwood
stick, cut from the tall broad hedges of that shrub, which is so
frequent in Lower Normandy.

This solitary wayfarer entered Carentan, the steeples of which, touched
by the moonlight, had only just appeared to him. His step woke the
echoes of the silent streets, but he met no one until he came to the
shop of a weaver, who was still at work. From him he inquired his way to
the mayor's house, and the way-worn recruit soon found himself seated
in the porch of that establishment, waiting for the billet he had asked
for. Instead of receiving it at once, he was summoned to the mayor's
presence, where he found himself the object of minute observation. The
young man was good-looking, and belonged, evidently, to a distinguished
family. His air and manner were those of the nobility. The intelligence
of a good education was in his face.

"What is your name?" asked the mayor, giving him a shrewd and meaning
look.

"Julien Jussieu."

"Where do you come from?" continued the magistrate, with a smile of
incredulity.

"Paris."

"Your comrades are at some distance," resumed the Norman official, in a
sarcastic tone.

"I am nine miles in advance of the battalion."

"Some strong feeling must be bringing you to Carentan, citizen recruit,"
said the mayor, slyly. "Very good, very good," he added hastily,
silencing with a wave of his hand a reply the young man was about to
make. "I know where to send you. Here," he added, giving him his billet,
"take this and go to that house, 'Citizen Jussieu.'"

So saying, the mayor held out to the recruit a billet, on which the
address of Madame de Dey's house was written. The young man read it with
an air of curiosity.

"He knows he hasn't far to go," thought the mayor as the recruit left
the house. "That's a bold fellow! God guide him! He seemed to have his
answers ready. But he'd have been lost if any one but I had questioned
him and demanded to see his papers."

At that instant, the clocks of Carentan struck half-past nine; the
lanterns were lighted in Madame de Dey's antechamber; the servants
were helping their masters and mistresses to put on their clogs, their
cloaks, and their mantles; the card-players had paid their debts, and
all the guests were preparing to leave together after the established
customs of provincial towns.

"The prosecutor, it seems, has stayed behind," said a lady, perceiving
that that important personage was missing, when the company parted in
the large square to go to their several houses.

That terrible magistrate was, in fact, alone with the countess, who
waited, trembling, till it should please him to depart.

"Citoyenne," he said, after a long silence in which there was something
terrifying, "I am here to enforce the laws of the Republic."

Madame de Dey shuddered.

"Have you nothing to reveal to me?" he demanded.

"Nothing," she replied, astonished.

"Ah! madame," cried the prosecutor, changing his tone and seating
himself beside her, "at this moment, for want of a word between us, you
and I may be risking our heads on the scaffold. I have too long observed
your character, your soul, your manners, to share the error into which
you have persuaded your friends this evening. You are, I cannot doubt,
expecting your son."

The countess made a gesture of denial; but she had turned pale, the
muscles of her face contracted from the effort that she made to exhibit
firmness, and the implacable eye of the public prosecutor lost none of
her movements.

"Well, receive him," continued the functionary of the Revolution, "but
do not keep him under your roof later than seven o'clock in the morning.
To-morrow, at eight, I shall be at your door with a denunciation."

She looked at him with a stupid air that might have made a tiger
pitiful.

"I will prove," he continued in a kindly voice, "the falsity of the
denunciation, by making a careful search of the premises; and the nature
of my report will protect you in future from all suspicions. I will
speak of your patriotic gifts, your civic virtues, and that will save
you."

Madame de Dey feared a trap, and she stood motionless; but her face was
on fire, and her tongue stiff in her mouth. A rap sounded on the door.

"Oh!" cried the mother, falling on her knees, "save him! save him!"

"Yes, we will save him," said the official, giving her a look of
passion; "if it costs us our life, we will save him."

"I am lost!" she murmured, as the prosecutor raised her courteously.

"Madame," he said, with an oratorical movement, "I will owe you only--to
yourself."

"Madame, he has come," cried Brigitte, rushing in and thinking her
mistress was alone.

At sight of the public prosecutor, the old woman, flushed and joyous as
she was, became motionless and livid.

"Who has come?" asked the prosecutor.

"A recruit, whom the mayor has sent to lodge here," replied Brigitte,
showing the billet.

"True," said the prosecutor, reading the paper. "We expect a detachment
to-night."

And he went away.

The countess had too much need at this moment to believe in the
sincerity of her former attorney, to distrust his promise. She mounted
the stairs rapidly, though her strength seemed failing her; then she
opened the door, saw her son, and fell into his arms half dead,--

"Oh! my child! my child!" she cried, sobbing, and covering him with
kisses in a sort of frenzy.

"Madame!" said an unknown man.

"Ah! it is not he!" she cried, recoiling in terror, and standing erect
before the recruit, at whom she gazed with a haggard eye.

"Holy Father! what a likeness!" said Brigitte.

There was silence for a moment. The recruit himself shuddered at the
aspect of Madame de Dey.

"Ah! monsieur," she said, leaning on Brigitte's husband, who had entered
the room, and feeling to its fullest extent an agony the fear of which
had already nearly killed her. "Monsieur, I cannot stay with you longer.
Allow my people to attend upon you."

She returned to her own room, half carried by Brigitte and her old
servant.

"Oh! madame," said Brigitte, as she undressed her mistress, "must that
man sleep in Monsieur Auguste's bed, and put on Monsieur Auguste's
slippers, and eat the pate I made for Monsieur Auguste? They may
guillotine me if I--"

"Brigitte!" cried Madame de Dey.

Brigitte was mute.

"Hush!" said her husband in her ear, "do you want to kill madame?"

At that moment the recruit made a noise in the room above by sitting
down to his supper.

"I cannot stay here!" cried Madame de Dey. "I will go into the
greenhouse; there I can hear what happens outside during the night."

She still floated between the fear of having lost her son and the hope
of his suddenly appearing.

The night was horribly silent. There was one dreadful moment for the
countess, when the battalion of recruits passed through the town, and
went to their several billets. Every step, every sound, was a hope,--and
a lost hope. After that the stillness continued. Towards morning the
countess was obliged to return to her room. Brigitte, who watched her
movements, was uneasy when she did not reappear, and entering the room
she found her dead.

"She must have heard that recruit walking about Monsieur Auguste's room,
and singing their damned Marseillaise, as if he were in a stable," cried
Brigitte. "That was enough to kill her!"

The death of the countess had a far more solemn cause; it resulted, no
doubt, from an awful vision. At the exact hour when Madame de Dey died
at Carentan, her son was shot in the Morbihan. That tragic fact may
be added to many recorded observations on sympathies that are known to
ignore the laws of space: records which men of solitude are collecting
with far-seeing curiosity, and which will some day serve as the basis
of a new science for which, up to the present time, a man of genius has
been lacking.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Recruit, by Honore de Balzac

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RECRUIT ***

***** This file should be named 1426.txt or 1426.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/4/2/1426/

Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
