The Reverberator~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Reverberator, by Henry James

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Reverberator

Author: Henry James

Release Date: February, 2005 [EBook #7529]
Posting Date: July 25, 2009
Last Updated: September 18, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVERBERATOR ***




Produced by Eve Sobol





THE REVERBERATOR


By Henry James




I

“I guess my daughter’s in here,” the old man said leading the way into
the little salon de lecture. He was not of the most advanced age, but
that is the way George Flack considered him, and indeed he looked older
than he was. George Flack had found him sitting in the court of the
hotel--he sat a great deal in the court of the hotel--and had gone up to
him with characteristic directness and asked him for Miss Francina. Poor
Mr. Dosson had with the greatest docility disposed himself to wait
on the young man: he had as a matter of course risen and made his way
across the court to announce to his child that she had a visitor. He
looked submissive, almost servile, as he preceded the visitor, thrusting
his head forward in his quest; but it was not in Mr. Flack’s line to
notice that sort of thing. He accepted the old gentleman’s good offices
as he would have accepted those of a waiter, conveying no hint of an
attention paid also to himself. An observer of these two persons would
have assured himself that the degree to which Mr. Dosson thought it
natural any one should want to see his daughter was only equalled by the
degree to which the young man thought it natural her father should take
trouble to produce her. There was a superfluous drapery in the doorway
of the salon de lecture, which Mr. Dosson pushed aside while George
Flack stepped in after him.

The reading-room of the Hotel de l’Univers et de Cheltenham was none
too ample, and had seemed to Mr. Dosson from the first to consist
principally of a highly-polished floor on the bareness of which it was
easy for a relaxed elderly American to slip. It was composed further,
to his perception, of a table with a green velvet cloth, of a fireplace
with a great deal of fringe and no fire, of a window with a great deal
of curtain and no light, and of the Figaro, which he couldn’t read, and
the New York Herald, which he had already read. A single person was just
now in possession of these conveniences--a young lady who sat with her
back to the window, looking straight before her into the conventional
room. She was dressed as for the street; her empty hands rested upon the
arms of her chair--she had withdrawn her long gloves, which were lying
in her lap--and she seemed to be doing nothing as hard as she could. Her
face was so much in shadow as to be barely distinguishable; nevertheless
the young man had a disappointed cry as soon as he saw her. “Why, it
ain’t Miss Francie--it’s Miss Delia!”

“Well, I guess we can fix that,” said Mr. Dosson, wandering further
into the room and drawing his feet over the floor without lifting
them. Whatever he did he ever seemed to wander: he had an impermanent
transitory air, an aspect of weary yet patient non-arrival, even when he
sat, as he was capable of sitting for hours, in the court of the inn. As
he glanced down at the two newspapers in their desert of green velvet
he raised a hopeless uninterested glass to his eye. “Delia dear, where’s
your little sister?”

Delia made no movement whatever, nor did any expression, so far as could
be perceived, pass over her large young face. She only ejaculated: “Why,
Mr. Flack, where did you drop from?”

“Well, this is a good place to meet,” her father remarked, as if mildly,
and as a mere passing suggestion, to deprecate explanations.

“Any place is good where one meets old friends,” said George Flack,
looking also at the newspapers. He examined the date of the American
sheet and then put it down. “Well, how do you like Paris?” he
subsequently went on to the young lady.

“We quite enjoy it; but of course we’re familiar now.”

“Well, I was in hopes I could show you something,” Mr. Flack said.

“I guess they’ve seen most everything,” Mr. Dosson observed.

“Well, we’ve seen more than you!” exclaimed his daughter.

“Well, I’ve seen a good deal--just sitting there.”

A person with delicate ear might have suspected Mr. Dosson of a tendency
to “setting”; but he would pronounce the same word in a different manner
at different times.

“Well, in Paris you can see everything,” said the young man. “I’m quite
enthusiastic about Paris.”

“Haven’t you been here before?” Miss Delia asked.

“Oh yes, but it’s ever fresh. And how is Miss Francie?”

“She’s all right. She has gone upstairs to get something. I guess we’re
going out again.”

“It’s very attractive for the young,” Mr. Dosson pleaded to the visitor.

“Well then, I’m one of the young. Do you mind if I go with you?” Mr.
Flack continued to the girl.

“It’ll seem like old times, on the deck,” she replied. “We’re going to
the Bon Marche.”

“Why don’t you go to the Louvre? That’s the place for YOU.”

“We’ve just come from there: we’ve had quite a morning.”

“Well, it’s a good place,” the visitor a trifle dryly opined.

“It’s good for some things but it doesn’t come up to my idea for
others.”

“Oh they’ve seen everything,” said Mr. Dosson. Then he added: “I guess
I’ll go and call Francie.”

“Well, tell her to hurry,” Miss Delia returned, swinging a glove in each
hand.

“She knows my pace,” Mr. Flack remarked.

“I should think she would, the way you raced!” the girl returned with
memories of the Umbria. “I hope you don’t expect to rush round Paris
that way.”

“I always rush. I live in a rush. That’s the way to get through.”

“Well, I AM through, I guess,” said Mr. Dosson philosophically.

“Well, I ain’t!” his daughter declared with decision.

“Well, you must come round often,” he continued to their friend as a
leave-taking.

“Oh, I’ll come round! I’ll have to rush, but I’ll do it.”

“I’ll send down Francie.” And Francie’s father crept away.

“And please give her some more money!” her sister called after him.

“Does she keep the money?” George Flack enquired.

“KEEP it?” Mr. Dosson stopped as he pushed aside the portiere. “Oh you
innocent young man!”

“I guess it’s the first time you were ever called innocent!” cried
Delia, left alone with the visitor.

“Well, I WAS--before I came to Paris.”

“Well, I can’t see that it has hurt US. We ain’t a speck extravagant.”

“Wouldn’t you have a right to be?”

“I don’t think any one has a right to be,” Miss Dosson returned
incorruptibly.

The young man, who had seated himself, looked at her a moment.

“That’s the way you used to talk.”

“Well, I haven’t changed.”

“And Miss Francie--has she?”

“Well, you’ll see,” said Delia Dosson, beginning to draw on her gloves.

Her companion watched her, leaning forward with his elbows on the arms
of his chair and his hands interlocked. At last he said interrogatively:
“Bon Marche?”

“No, I got them in a little place I know.”

“Well, they’re Paris anyway.”

“Of course they’re Paris. But you can get gloves anywhere.”

“You must show me the little place anyhow,” Mr. Flack continued
sociably. And he observed further and with the same friendliness: “The
old gentleman seems all there.”

“Oh he’s the dearest of the dear.”

“He’s a real gentleman--of the old stamp,” said George Flack.

“Well, what should you think our father would be?”

“I should think he’d be delighted!”

“Well, he is, when we carry out our plans.”

“And what are they--your plans?” asked the young man.

“Oh I never tell them.”

“How then does he know whether you carry them out?”

“Well, I guess he’d know it if we didn’t,” said the girl.

“I remember how secretive you were last year. You kept everything to
yourself.”

“Well, I know what I want,” the young lady pursued.

He watched her button one of her gloves deftly, using a hairpin released
from some mysterious office under her bonnet. There was a moment’s
silence, after which they looked up at each other. “I’ve an idea you
don’t want me,” said George Flack.

“Oh yes, I do--as a friend.”

“Of all the mean ways of trying to get rid of a man that’s the meanest!”
 he rang out.

“Where’s the meanness when I suppose you’re not so ridiculous as to wish
to be anything more!”

“More to your sister, do you mean--or to yourself?”

“My sister IS myself--I haven’t got any other,” said Delia Dosson.

“Any other sister?”

“Don’t be idiotic. Are you still in the same business?” the girl went
on.

“Well, I forget which one I WAS in.”

“Why, something to do with that newspaper--don’t you remember?”

“Yes, but it isn’t that paper any more--it’s a different one.”

“Do you go round for news--in the same way?”

“Well, I try to get the people what they want. It’s hard work,” said the
young man.

“Well, I suppose if you didn’t some one else would. They will have it,
won’t they?”

“Yes, they will have it.” The wants of the people, however, appeared at
the present moment to interest Mr. Flack less than his own. He looked at
his watch and remarked that the old gentleman didn’t seem to have much
authority.

“What do you mean by that?” the girl asked.

“Why with Miss Francie. She’s taking her time, or rather, I mean, she’s
taking mine.”

“Well, if you expect to do anything with her you must give her plenty of
that,” Delia returned.

“All right: I’ll give her all I have.” And Miss Dosson’s interlocutor
leaned back in his chair with folded arms, as to signify how much, if
it came to that, she might have to count with his patience. But she sat
there easy and empty, giving no sign and fearing no future. He was the
first indeed to turn again to restlessness: at the end of a few moments
he asked the young lady if she didn’t suppose her father had told her
sister who it was.

“Do you think that’s all that’s required?” she made answer with cold
gaiety. But she added more familiarly: “Probably that’s the reason.
She’s so shy.”

“Oh yes--she used to look it.”

“No, that’s her peculiarity, that she never looks it and yet suffers
everything.”

“Well, you make it up for her then, Miss Delia,” the young man ventured
to declare. “You don’t suffer much.”

“No, for Francie I’m all there. I guess I could act for her.”

He had a pause. “You act for her too much. If it wasn’t for you I think
I could do something.”

“Well, you’ve got to kill me first!” Delia Dosson replied.

“I’ll come down on you somehow in the Reverberator” he went on.

But the threat left her calm. “Oh that’s not what the people want.”

“No, unfortunately they don’t care anything about MY affairs.”

“Well, we do: we’re kinder than most, Francie and I,” said the girl.
“But we desire to keep your affairs quite distinct from ours.”

“Oh your--yours: if I could only discover what they are!” cried George
Flack. And during the rest of the time that they waited the young
journalist tried to find out. If an observer had chanced to be present
for the quarter of an hour that elapsed, and had had any attention to
give to these vulgar young persons, he would have wondered perhaps at
there being so much mystery on one side and so much curiosity on the
other--wondered at least at the elaboration of inscrutable projects on
the part of a girl who looked to the casual eye as if she were stolidly
passive. Fidelia Dosson, whose name had been shortened, was twenty-five
years old and had a large white face, in which the eyes were far apart.
Her forehead was high but her mouth was small, her hair was light and
colourless and a certain inelegant thickness of figure made her appear
shorter than she was. Elegance indeed had not been her natural portion,
and the Bon Marche and other establishments had to make up for that. To
a casual sister’s eye they would scarce have appeared to have acquitted
themselves of their office, but even a woman wouldn’t have guessed how
little Fidelia cared. She always looked the same; all the contrivances
of Paris couldn’t fill out that blank, and she held them, for herself,
in no manner of esteem. It was a plain clean round pattern face, marked
for recognition among so many only perhaps by a small figure, the sprig
on a china plate, that might have denoted deep obstinacy; and yet, with
its settled smoothness, it was neither stupid nor hard. It was as
calm as a room kept dusted and aired for candid earnest occasions,
the meeting of unanimous committees and the discussion of flourishing
businesses. If she had been a young man--and she had a little the head
of one--it would probably have been thought of her that she was likely
to become a Doctor or a Judge.

An observer would have gathered, further, that Mr. Flack’s acquaintance
with Mr. Dosson and his daughters had had its origin in his crossing the
Atlantic eastward in their company more than a year before, and in some
slight association immediately after disembarking, but that each party
had come and gone a good deal since then--come and gone however without
meeting again. It was to be inferred that in this interval Miss Dosson
had led her father and sister back to their native land and had then a
second time directed their course to Europe. This was a new departure,
said Mr. Flack, or rather a new arrival: he understood that it
wasn’t, as he called it, the same old visit. She didn’t repudiate
the accusation, launched by her companion as if it might have been
embarrassing, of having spent her time at home in Boston, and even in a
suburban quarter of it: she confessed that as Bostonians they had been
capable of that. But now they had come abroad for longer--ever so much:
what they had gone home for was to make arrangements for a European
stay of which the limits were not to be told. So far as this particular
future opened out to her she freely acknowledged it. It appeared to meet
with George Flack’s approval--he also had a big undertaking on that side
and it might require years, so that it would be pleasant to have his
friends right there. He knew his way round in Paris--or any place like
that--much better than round Boston; if they had been poked away in one
of those clever suburbs they would have been lost to him.

“Oh, well, you’ll see as much as you want of us--the way you’ll have to
take us,” Delia Dosson said: which led the young man to ask which
that way was and to guess he had never known but one way to take
anything--which was just as it came. “Oh well, you’ll see what you’ll
make of it,” the girl returned; and she would give for the present no
further explanation of her somewhat chilling speech. In spite if
it however she professed an interest in Mr. Flack’s announced
undertaking--an interest springing apparently from an interest in the
personage himself. The man of wonderments and measurements we have
smuggled into the scene would have gathered that Miss Dosson’s attention
was founded on a conception of Mr. Flack’s intrinsic brilliancy. Would
his own impression have justified that?--would he have found such a
conception contagious? I forbear to ridicule the thought, for that would
saddle me with the care of showing what right our officious observer
might have had to his particular standard. Let us therefore simply
note that George Flack had grounds for looming publicly large to
an uninformed young woman. He was connected, as she supposed, with
literature, and wasn’t a sympathy with literature one of the many
engaging attributes of her so generally attractive little sister? If
Mr. Flack was a writer Francie was a reader: hadn’t a trail of forgotten
Tauchnitzes marked the former line of travel of the party of three? The
elder girl grabbed at them on leaving hotels and railway-carriages, but
usually found that she had brought odd volumes. She considered
however that as a family they had an intellectual link with the young
journalist, and would have been surprised if she had heard the advantage
of his acquaintance questioned.

Mr. Flack’s appearance was not so much a property of his own as a
prejudice or a fixed liability of those who looked at him: whoever they
might be what they saw mainly in him was that they had seen him before.
And, oddly enough, this recognition carried with it in general no
ability to remember--that is to recall--him: you couldn’t conveniently
have prefigured him, and it was only when you were conscious of him that
you knew you had already somehow paid for it. To carry him in your mind
you must have liked him very much, for no other sentiment, not even
aversion, would have taught you what distinguished him in his group:
aversion in especial would have made you aware only of what confounded
him. He was not a specific person, but had beyond even Delia Dosson,
in whom we have facially noted it, the quality of the sample or
advertisement, the air of representing a “line of goods” for which there
is a steady popular demand. You would scarce have expected him to be
individually designated: a number, like that of the day’s newspaper,
would have served all his, or at least all your purpose, and you would
have vaguely supposed the number high--somewhere up in the millions. As
every copy of the newspaper answers to its name, Miss Dosson’s visitor
would have been quite adequately marked as “young commercial American.”
 Let me add that among the accidents of his appearance was that of its
sometimes striking other young commercial Americans as fine. He was
twenty-seven years old and had a small square head, a light grey
overcoat and in his right forefinger a curious natural crook which might
have availed, under pressure, to identify him. But for the convenience
of society he ought always to have worn something conspicuous--a green
hat or a yellow necktie. His undertaking was to obtain material in
Europe for an American “society-paper.”

If it be objected to all this that when Francie Dosson at last came in
she addressed him as if she easily placed him, the answer is that she
had been notified by her father--and more punctually than was indicated
by the manner of her response. “Well, the way you DO turn up,” she said,
smiling and holding out her left hand to him: in the other hand, or the
hollow of her slim right arm, she had a lumpish parcel. Though she had
made him wait she was clearly very glad to see him there; and she as
evidently required and enjoyed a great deal of that sort of indulgence.
Her sister’s attitude would have told you so even if her own appearance
had not. There was that in her manner to the young man--a perceptible
but indefinable shade--which seemed to legitimate the oddity of his
having asked in particular for her, asked as if he wished to see her to
the exclusion of her father and sister: the note of a special pleasure
which might have implied a special relation. And yet a spectator looking
from Mr. George Flack to Miss Francie Dosson would have been much at a
loss to guess what special relation could exist between them. The girl
was exceedingly, extraordinarily pretty, all exempt from traceable
likeness to her sister; and there was a brightness in her--a still
and scattered radiance--which was quite distinct from what is called
animation. Rather tall than short, fine slender erect, with an airy
lightness of hand and foot, she yet gave no impression of quick
movement, of abundant chatter, of excitable nerves and irrepressible
life--no hint of arriving at her typical American grace in the most
usual way. She was pretty without emphasis and as might almost have been
said without point, and your fancy that a little stiffness would have
improved her was at once qualified by the question of what her softness
would have made of it. There was nothing in her, however, to confirm
the implication that she had rushed about the deck of a Cunarder with a
newspaper-man. She was as straight as a wand and as true as a gem; her
neck was long and her grey eyes had colour; and from the ripple of her
dark brown hair to the curve of her unaffirmative chin every line in
her face was happy and pure. She had a weak pipe of a voice and
inconceivabilities of ignorance.

Delia got up, and they came out of the little reading-room--this young
lady remarking to her sister that she hoped she had brought down all
the things. “Well, I had a fiendish hunt for them--we’ve got so many,”
 Francie replied with a strange want of articulation. “There were a few
dozens of the pocket-handkerchiefs I couldn’t find; but I guess I’ve got
most of them and most of the gloves.”

“Well, what are you carting them about for?” George Flack enquired,
taking the parcel from her. “You had better let me handle them. Do you
buy pocket-handkerchiefs by the hundred?”

“Well, it only makes fifty apiece,” Francie yieldingly smiled. “They
ain’t really nice--we’re going to change them.”

“Oh I won’t be mixed up with that--you can’t work that game on these
Frenchmen!” the young man stated.

“Oh with Francie they’ll take anything back,” Delia Dosson declared.
“They just love her, all over.”

“Well, they’re like me then,” said Mr. Flack with friendly cheer. “I’LL
take her back if she’ll come.”

“Well, I don’t think I’m ready quite yet,” the girl replied. “But I hope
very much we shall cross with you again.”

“Talk about crossing--it’s on these boulevards we want a
life-preserver!” Delia loudly commented. They had passed out of the
hotel and the wide vista of the Rue de la Paix stretched up and down.
There were many vehicles.

“Won’t this thing do? I’ll tie it to either of you,” George Flack said,
holding out his bundle. “I suppose they won’t kill you if they love
you,” he went on to the object of his preference.

“Well, you’ve got to know me first,” she answered, laughing and looking
for a chance, while they waited to pass over.

“I didn’t know you when I was struck.” He applied his disengaged hand to
her elbow and propelled her across the street. She took no notice of
his observation, and Delia asked her, on the other side, whether their
father had given her that money. She replied that he had given her
loads--she felt as if he had made his will; which led George Flack to
say that he wished the old gentleman was HIS father.

“Why you don’t mean to say you want to be our brother!” Francie prattled
as they went down the Rue de la Paix.

“I should like to be Miss Delia’s, if you can make that out,” he
laughed.

“Well then suppose you prove it by calling me a cab,” Miss
Delia returned. “I presume you and Francie don’t take this for a
promenade-deck.”

“Don’t she feel rich?” George Flack demanded of Francie. “But we do
require a cart for our goods”; and he hailed a little yellow carriage,
which presently drew up beside the pavement. The three got into it and,
still emitting innocent pleasantries, proceeded on their way, while at
the Hotel de l’Univers et de Cheltenham Mr. Dosson wandered down into
the court again and took his place in his customary chair.




II

The court was roofed with glass; the April air was mild; the cry of
women selling violets came in from the street and, mingling with the
rich hum of Paris, seemed to bring with it faintly the odour of the
flowers. There were other odours in the place, warm succulent and
Parisian, which ranged from fried fish to burnt sugar; and there were
many things besides: little tables for the post-prandial coffee; piles
of luggage inscribed (after the initials or frequently the name) R.
P. Scudamore or D. Jackson Hodge, Philadelphia Pa., or St. Louis
Mo.; rattles of unregarded bells, flittings of tray-bearing waiters,
conversations with the second-floor windows of admonitory landladies,
arrivals of young women with coffinlike bandboxes covered with black
oil-cloth and depending from a strap, sallyings-forth of persons staying
and arrivals just afterwards of other persons to see them; together with
vague prostrations on benches of tired heads of American families.
It was to this last element that Mr. Dosson himself in some degree
contributed, but it must be added that he had not the extremely bereft
and exhausted appearance of certain of his fellows. There was an air of
ruminant resignation, of habitual accommodation in him; but you would
have guessed that he was enjoying a holiday rather than aching for a
truce, and he was not so enfeebled but that he was able to get up from
time to time and stroll through the porte cochere to have a look at the
street.

He gazed up and down for five minutes with his hands in his pockets, and
then came back; that appeared to content him; he asked for little and
had no restlessness that these small excursions wouldn’t assuage. He
looked at the heaped-up luggage, at the tinkling bells, at the young
women from the lingere, at the repudiated visitors, at everything but
the other American parents. Something in his breast told him that he
knew all about these. It’s not upon each other that the animals in the
same cage, in a zoological collection, most turn their eyes. There was
a silent sociability in him and a superficial fineness of grain that
helped to account for his daughter Francie’s various delicacies. He was
fair and spare and had no figure; you would have seen in a moment
that the question of how he should hold himself had never in his life
occurred to him. He never held himself at all; providence held him
rather--and very loosely--by an invisible string at the end of which he
seemed gently to dangle and waver. His face was so smooth that his thin
light whiskers, which grew only far back, scarcely seemed native to his
cheeks: they might have been attached there for some harmless purpose of
comedy or disguise. He looked for the most part as if he were thinking
over, without exactly understanding it, something rather droll that had
just occurred; if his eyes wandered his attention rested, just as
it hurried, quite as little. His feet were remarkably small, and his
clothes, in which light colours predominated, were visibly the work of
a French tailor: he was an American who still held the tradition that it
is in Paris a man dresses himself best. His hat would have looked odd in
Bond Street or the Fifth Avenue, and his necktie was loose and flowing.

Mr. Dosson, it may further be noted, was a person of the simplest
composition, a character as cipherable as a sum of two figures. He had
a native financial faculty of the finest order, a gift as direct as
a beautiful tenor voice, which had enabled him, without the aid of
particular strength of will or keenness of ambition, to build up a large
fortune while he was still of middle age. He had a genius for happy
speculation, the quick unerring instinct of a “good thing”; and as he
sat there idle amused contented, on the edge of the Parisian street,
he might very well have passed for some rare performer who had sung his
song or played his trick and had nothing to do till the next call.
And he had grown rich not because he was ravenous or hard, but simply
because he had an ear, not to term it a nose. He could make out the tune
in the discord of the market-place; he could smell success far up
the wind. The second factor in his little addition was that he was an
unassuming father. He had no tastes, no acquirements, no curiosities,
and his daughters represented all society for him. He thought much
more and much oftener of these young ladies than of his bank-shares and
railway-stock; they crowned much more his sense of accumulated property.
He never compared them with other girls; he only compared his present
self with what he would have been without them. His view of them was
perfectly simple. Delia had a greater direct knowledge of life and
Francie a wider acquaintance with literature and art. Mr. Dosson had
not perhaps a full perception of his younger daughter’s beauty: he
would scarcely have pretended to judge of that, more than he would of a
valuable picture or vase, but he believed she was cultivated up to the
eyes. He had a recollection of tremendous school-bills and, in later
days, during their travels, of the way she was always leaving books
behind her. Moreover wasn’t her French so good that he couldn’t
understand it?

The two girls, at any rate, formed the breeze in his sail and the only
directing determinant force he knew; when anything happened--and he was
under the impression that things DID happen--they were there for it to
have happened TO. Without them in short, as he felt, he would have been
the tail without the kite. The wind rose and fell of course; there were
lulls and there were gales; there were intervals during which he simply
floated in quiet waters--cast anchor and waited. This appeared to be one
of them now; but he could be patient, knowing that he should soon again
inhale the brine and feel the dip of his prow. When his daughters were
out for any time the occasion affected him as a “weather-breeder”--the
wind would be then, as a kind of consequence, GOING to rise; but their
now being out with a remarkably bright young man only sweetened the
temporary calm. That belonged to their superior life, and Mr. Dosson
never doubted that George M. Flack was remarkably bright. He represented
the newspaper, and the newspaper for this man of genial assumptions
represented--well, all other representations whatever. To know Delia and
Francie thus attended by an editor or a correspondent was really to see
them dancing in the central glow. This is doubtless why Mr. Dosson had
slightly more than usual his air of recovering slowly from a pleasant
surprise. The vision to which I allude hung before him, at a convenient
distance, and melted into other bright confused aspects: reminiscences
of Mr. Flack in other relations--on the ship, on the deck, at the hotel
at Liverpool, and in the cars. Whitney Dosson was a loyal father, but
he would have thought himself simple had he not had two or three strong
convictions: one of which was that the children should never go out with
a gentleman they hadn’t seen before. The sense of their having, and his
having, seen Mr. Flack before was comfortable to him now: it made mere
placidity of his personally foregoing the young man’s society in favour
of Delia and Francie. He had not hitherto been perfectly satisfied that
the streets and shops, the general immensity of Paris, were just the
safest place for young ladies alone. But the company of a helpful
gentleman ensured safety--a gentleman who would be helpful by the fact
of his knowing so much and having it all right there. If a big newspaper
told you everything there was in the world every morning, that was
what a big newspaper-man would have to know, and Mr. Dosson had never
supposed there was anything left to know when such voices as Mr. Flack’s
and that of his organ had daily been heard. In the absence of such happy
chances--and in one way or another they kept occurring--his girls might
have seemed lonely, which was not the way he struck himself. They were
his company but he scarcely theirs; it was as if they belonged to him
more than he to them.

They were out a long time, but he felt no anxiety, as he reflected that
Mr. Flack’s very profession would somehow make everything turn out to
their profit. The bright French afternoon waned without bringing them
back, yet Mr. Dosson still revolved about the court till he might have
been taken for a valet de place hoping to pick up custom. The landlady
smiled at him sometimes as she passed and re-passed, and even ventured
to remark disinterestedly that it was a pity to waste such a lovely day
indoors--not to take a turn and see what was going on in Paris. But Mr.
Dosson had no sense of waste: that came to him much more when he was
confronted with historical monuments or beauties of nature or art, which
affected him as the talk of people naming others, naming friends of
theirs, whom he had never heard of: then he was aware of a degree of
waste for the others, as if somebody lost something--but never when he
lounged in that simplifying yet so comprehensive way in the court. It
wanted but a quarter of an hour to dinner--THAT historic fact was not
beyond his measure--when Delia and Francie at last met his view, still
accompanied by Mr. Flack and sauntering in, at a little distance from
each other, with a jaded air which was not in the least a tribute to his
possible solicitude. They dropped into chairs and joked with each other,
mingling sociability and languor, on the subject of what they had
seen and done--a question into which he felt as yet the delicacy of
enquiring. But they had evidently done a good deal and had a good
time: an impression sufficient to rescue Mr. Dosson personally from the
consciousness of failure. “Won’t you just step in and take dinner with
us?” he asked of the young man with a friendliness to which everything
appeared to minister.

“Well, that’s a handsome offer,” George Flack replied while Delia put it
on record that they had each eaten about thirty cakes.

“Well, I wondered what you were doing so long. But never mind your
cakes. It’s twenty minutes past six, and the table d’hote’s on time.”

“You don’t mean to say you dine at the table d’hote!” Mr. Flack cried.

“Why, don’t you like that?”--and Francie’s candour of appeal to their
comrade’s taste was celestial.

“Well, it isn’t what you must build on when you come to Paris. Too many
flowerpots and chickens’ legs.”

“Well, would you like one of these restaurants?” asked Mr. Dosson. “_I_
don’t care--if you show us a good one.”

“Oh I’ll show you a good one--don’t you worry.” Mr. Flack’s tone was
ever that of keeping the poor gentleman mildly but firmly in his place.

“Well, you’ve got to order the dinner then,” said Francie.

“Well, you’ll see how I could do it!” He towered over her in the pride
of this feat.

“He has got an interest in some place,” Delia declared. “He has taken us
to ever so many stores where he gets his commission.”

“Well, I’d pay you to take them round,” said Mr. Dosson; and with much
agreeable trifling of this kind it was agreed that they should sally
forth for the evening meal under Mr. Flack’s guidance.

If he had easily convinced them on this occasion that that was a more
original proceeding than worrying those old bones, as he called it, at
the hotel, he convinced them of other things besides in the course of
the following month and by the aid of profuse attentions. What he mainly
made clear to them was that it was really most kind of a young man who
had so many big things on his mind to find sympathy for questions, for
issues, he used to call them, that could occupy the telegraph and the
press so little as theirs. He came every day to set them in the right
path, pointing out its charms to them in a way that made them feel how
much they had been in the wrong. It made them feel indeed that they
didn’t know anything about anything, even about such a matter as
ordering shoes--an art in which they had vaguely supposed themselves
rather strong. He had in fact great knowledge, which was wonderfully
various, and he knew as many people as they knew few. He had
appointments--very often with celebrities--for every hour of the day,
and memoranda, sometimes in shorthand, on tablets with elastic straps,
with which he dazzled the simple folk at the Hotel de l’Univers et de
Cheltenham, whose social life, of narrow range, consisted mainly in
reading the lists of Americans who “registered” at the bankers’ and at
Galignani’s. Delia Dosson in particular had a trick of poring solemnly
over these records which exasperated Mr. Flack, who skimmed them and
found what he wanted in the flash of an eye: she kept the others waiting
while she satisfied herself that Mr. and Mrs. D. S. Rosenheim and Miss
Cora Rosenheim and Master Samuel Rosenheim had “left for Brussels.”

Mr. Flack was wonderful on all occasions in finding what he
wanted--which, as we know, was what he believed the public wanted--and
Delia was the only one of the party with whom he was sometimes a little
sharp. He had embraced from the first the idea that she was his enemy,
and he alluded to it with almost tiresome frequency, though always in a
humorous fearless strain. Even more than by her fashion of hanging over
the registers she provoked him by appearing to find their little party
not sufficient to itself, by wishing, as he expressed it, to work in new
stuff. He might have been easy, however, for he had sufficient chance to
observe how it was always the fate of the Dossons to miss their friends.
They were continually looking out for reunions and combinations that
never came off, hearing that people had been in Paris only after they
had gone away, or feeling convinced that they were there but not to be
found through their not having registered, or wondering whether they
should overtake them if they should go to Dresden, and then making up
their minds to start for Dresden only to learn at the eleventh hour,
through some accident, that the hunted game had “left for” Biarritz even
as the Rosenheims for Brussels. “We know plenty of people if we could
only come across them,” Delia had more than once observed: she
scanned the Continent with a wondering baffled gaze and talked of the
unsatisfactory way in which friends at home would “write out” that other
friends were “somewhere in Europe.” She expressed the wish that such
correspondents as that might be in a place that was not at all vague.
Two or three times people had called at the hotel when they were out and
had left cards for them without an address and superscribed with some
mocking dash of the pencil--“So sorry to miss you!” or “Off to-morrow!”
 The girl sat looking at these cards, handling them and turning them over
for a quarter of an hour at a time; she produced them days afterwards,
brooding upon them afresh as if they were a mystic clue. George Flack
generally knew where they were, the people who were “somewhere in
Europe.” Such knowledge came to him by a kind of intuition, by the
voices of the air, by indefinable and unteachable processes. But he held
his peace on purpose; he didn’t want any outsiders; he thought their
little party just right. Mr. Dosson’s place in the scheme of Providence
was to “go” with Delia while he himself “went” with Francie, and nothing
would have induced George Flack to disfigure that equation. The young
man was professionally so occupied with other people’s affairs that it
should doubtless be mentioned to his praise that he still managed to
have affairs--or at least an affair--of his own. That affair was Francie
Dosson, and he was pleased to perceive how little SHE cared what had
become of Mr. and Mrs. Rosenheim and Master Samuel and Miss Cora. He
counted all the things she didn’t care about--her soft inadvertent eyes
helped him to do that; and they footed up so, as he would have said,
that they gave him the rich sense of a free field. If she had so few
interests there was the greater possibility that a young man of bold
conceptions and cheerful manners might become one. She had usually the
air of waiting for something, with a pretty listlessness or an amused
resignation, while tender shy indefinite little fancies hummed in her
brain. Thus she would perhaps recognise in him the reward of patience.
George Flack was aware that he exposed his friends to considerable
fatigue: he brought them back pale and taciturn from suburban excursions
and from wanderings often rather aimless and casual among the boulevards
and avenues of the town. He regarded them at such times with complacency
however, for these were hours of diminished resistance: he had an idea
that he should be able eventually to circumvent Delia if he only could
catch her some day sufficiently, that is physically, prostrate. He liked
to make them all feel helpless and dependent, and this was not difficult
with people who were so modest and artless, so unconscious of the
boundless power of wealth. Sentiment, in our young man, was not a
scruple nor a source of weakness; but he thought it really touching, the
little these good people knew of what they could do with their money.
They had in their hands a weapon of infinite range and yet were
incapable of firing a shot for themselves. They had a sort of social
humility; it appeared never to have occurred to them that, added to
their loveliness, their money gave them a value. This used to strike
George Flack on certain occasions when he came back to find them in the
places where he had dropped them while he rushed off to give a turn
to one of his screws. They never played him false, never wearied of
waiting; always sat patient and submissive, usually at a cafe to which
he had introduced them or in a row of chairs on the boulevard, on the
level expanse of the Tuileries or in the Champs Elysees.

He introduced them to many cafes, in different parts of Paris, being
careful to choose those which in his view young ladies might frequent
with propriety, and there were two or three in the neighbourhood of
their hotel where they became frequent and familiar figures. As the
late spring days grew warmer and brighter they mainly camped out on
the “terrace,” amid the array of small tables at the door of the
establishment, where Mr. Flack, on the return, could descry them
from afar at their post and in the very same postures to which he
had appointed them. They complained of no satiety in watching the
many-coloured movement of the Parisian streets; and if some of the
features in the panorama were base they were only so in a version that
the social culture of our friends was incapable of supplying. George
Flack considered that he was rendering a positive service to Mr. Dosson:
wouldn’t the old gentleman have sat all day in the court anyway? and
wasn’t the boulevard better than the court? It was his theory too that
he nattered and caressed Miss Francie’s father, for there was no one
to whom he had furnished more copious details about the affairs, the
projects and prospects, of the Reverberator. He had left no doubt in the
old gentleman’s mind as to the race he himself intended to run, and Mr.
Dosson used to say to him every day, the first thing, “Well, where have
you got to now?”--quite as if he took a real interest. George Flack
reported his interviews, that is his reportings, to which Delia and
Francie gave attention only in case they knew something of the persons
on whom the young emissary of the Reverberator had conferred
this distinction; whereas Mr. Dosson listened, with his tolerant
interposition of “Is that so?” and “Well, that’s good,” just as
submissively when he heard of the celebrity in question for the first
time.

In conversation with his daughters Mr. Flack was frequently the theme,
though introduced much more by the young ladies than by himself, and
especially by Delia, who announced at an early period that she knew what
he wanted and that it wasn’t in the least what SHE wanted. She amplified
this statement very soon--at least as regards her interpretation of Mr.
Flack’s designs: a certain mystery still hung about her own, which, as
she intimated, had much more to recommend them. Delia’s vision of the
danger as well as the advantage of being a pretty girl was closely
connected, as was natural, with the idea of an “engagement”: this idea
was in a manner complete in itself--her imagination failed in the oddest
way to carry it into the next stage. She wanted her sister to be engaged
but wanted her not at all to be married, and had clearly never made up
her mind as to how Francie was to enjoy both the peril and the shelter.
It was a secret source of humiliation to her that there had as yet to
her knowledge been no one with whom her sister had exchanged vows; if
her conviction on this subject could have expressed itself intelligibly
it would have given you a glimpse of a droll state of mind--a dim theory
that a bright girl ought to be able to try successive aspirants. Delia’s
conception of what such a trial might consist of was strangely innocent:
it was made up of calls and walks and buggy-drives, and above all of
being, in the light of these exhibitions, the theme of tongues and
subject to the great imputation. It had never in life occurred to
her withal that a succession of lovers, or just even a repetition of
experiments, may have anything to say to a young lady’s delicacy. She
felt herself a born old maid and never dreamed of a lover of her own--he
would have been dreadfully in her way; but she dreamed of love
as something in its nature essentially refined. All the same she
discriminated; it did lead to something after all, and she desired that
for Francie it shouldn’t lead to a union with Mr. Flack. She looked at
such a union under the influence of that other view which she kept as
yet to herself but was prepared to produce so soon as the right occasion
should come up; giving her sister to understand that she would never
speak to her again should this young man be allowed to suppose--! Which
was where she always paused, plunging again into impressive reticence.

“To suppose what?” Francie would ask as if she were totally
unacquainted--which indeed she really was--with the suppositions of
young men.

“Well, you’ll see--when he begins to say things you won’t like!” This
sounded ominous on Delia’s part, yet her anxiety was really but thin:
otherwise she would have risen against the custom adopted by Mr. Flack
of perpetually coming round. She would have given her attention--though
it struggled in general unsuccessfully with all this side of their
life--to some prompt means of getting away from Paris. She expressed to
her father what in her view the correspondent of the Reverberator was
“after”; but without, it must be added, gaining from him the sense of it
as a connexion in which he could be greatly worked up. This indeed was
not of importance, thanks to her inner faith that Francie would never
really do anything--that is would never really like anything--her
nearest relatives didn’t like. Her sister’s docility was a great comfort
to Delia, the more that she herself, taking it always for granted, was
the first to profit by it. She liked and disliked certain things much
more than her junior did either; and Francie cultivated the convenience
of her reasons, having so few of her own. They served--Delia’s
reasons--for Mr. Dosson as well, so that Francie was not guilty of any
particular irreverence in regarding her sister rather than her father as
the controller of her fate. A fate was rather an unwieldy and terrible
treasure, which it relieved her that some kind person should undertake
to administer. Delia had somehow got hold of hers first--before even her
father, and ever so much before Mr. Flack; and it lay with Delia to make
any change. She couldn’t have accepted any gentleman as a party to an
engagement--which was somehow as far as her imagination went--without
reference to Delia, any more than she could have done up her hair
without a glass. The only action taken by Mr. Dosson on his elder
daughter’s admonitions was to convert the general issue, as Mr. Flack
would have called it, to a theme for daily pleasantry. He was fond,
in his intercourse with his children, of some small usual joke, some
humorous refrain; and what could have been more in the line of true
domestic sport than a little gentle but unintermitted raillery on
Francie’s conquest? Mr. Flack’s attributive intentions became a theme of
indulgent parental chaff, and the girl was neither dazzled nor annoyed
by the freedom of all this tribute. “Well, he HAS told us about half
we know,” she used to reply with an air of the judicious that the
undetected observer I am perpetually moved to invoke would have found
indescribably quaint.

Among the items of knowledge for which they were indebted to him floated
the fact that this was the very best time in the young lady’s life to
have her portrait painted and the best place in the world to have it
done well; also that he knew a “lovely artist,” a young American of
extraordinary talent, who would be delighted to undertake the job. He
led his trio to this gentleman’s studio, where they saw several
pictures that opened to them the strange gates of mystification. Francie
protested that she didn’t want to be done in THAT style, and Delia
declared that she would as soon have her sister shown up in a magic
lantern. They had had the fortune not to find Mr. Waterlow at home, so
that they were free to express themselves and the pictures were shown
them by his servant. They looked at them as they looked at bonnets and
confections when they went to expensive shops; as if it were a question,
among so many specimens, of the style and colour they would choose.
Mr. Waterlow’s productions took their place for the most part in the
category of those creations known to ladies as frights, and our friends
retired with the lowest opinion of the young American master. George
Flack told them however that they couldn’t get out of it, inasmuch as
he had already written home to the Reverberator that Francie was to sit.
They accepted this somehow as a kind of supernatural sign that she would
have to, for they believed everything they ever heard quoted from a
newspaper. Moreover Mr. Flack explained to them that it would be idiotic
to miss such an opportunity to get something at once precious and cheap;
for it was well known that impressionism was going to be the art of the
future, and Charles Waterlow was a rising impressionist. It was a new
system altogether and the latest improvement in art. They didn’t want
to go back, they wanted to go forward, and he would give them an
article that would fetch five times the money in about five years--which
somehow, as he put it, seemed a very short time, though it would have
seemed immense for anything else. They were not in search of a bargain,
but they allowed themselves to be inoculated with any reason they
thought would be characteristic of informed people; and he even
convinced them after a little that when once they had got used to
impressionism they would never look at anything else. Mr. Waterlow
was the man, among the young, and he had no interest in praising him,
because he was not a personal friend: his reputation was advancing
with strides, and any one with any sense would want to secure something
before the rush.




III

The young ladies consented to return to the Avenue des Villiers;
and this time they found the celebrity of the future. He was
smoking cigarettes with a friend while coffee was served to the two
gentlemen--it was just after luncheon--on a vast divan covered with
scrappy oriental rugs and cushions; it looked, Francie thought, as if
the artist had set up a carpet-shop in a corner. He struck her as very
pleasant; and it may be mentioned without circumlocution that the young
lady ushered in by the vulgar American reporter, whom he didn’t like and
who had already come too often to his studio to pick up “glimpses” (the
painter wondered how in the world he had picked HER up), this charming
candidate for portraiture rose on the spot before Charles Waterlow as
a precious model. She made, it may further be declared, quite the same
impression on the gentleman who was with him and who never took his eyes
off her while her own rested afresh on several finished and unfinished
canvases. This gentleman asked of his friend at the end of five minutes
the favour of an introduction to her; in consequence of which Francie
learned that his name--she thought it singular--was Gaston Probert. Mr.
Probert was a kind-eyed smiling youth who fingered the points of his
moustache; he was represented by Mr. Waterlow as an American, but he
pronounced the American language--so at least it seemed to Francie--as
if it had been French.

After she had quitted the studio with Delia and Mr. Flack--her father on
this occasion not being of the party--the two young men, falling back
on their divan, broke into expressions of aesthetic rapture, gave it to
each other that the girl had qualities--oh but qualities and a charm
of line! They remained there an hour, studying these rare properties
through the smoke of their cigarettes. You would have gathered from
their conversation--though as regards much of it only perhaps with the
aid of a grammar and dictionary--that the young lady had been endowed
with plastic treasures, that is with physical graces, of the highest
order, of which she was evidently quite unconscious. Before this,
however, Mr. Waterlow had come to an understanding with his visitors--it
had been settled that Miss Francina should sit for him at his first hour
of leisure. Unfortunately that hour hovered before him as still rather
distant--he was unable to make a definite appointment. He had sitters
on his hands, he had at least three portraits to finish before going
to Spain. He adverted with bitterness to the journey to Spain--a little
excursion laid out precisely with his friend Probert for the last weeks
of the spring, the first of the southern summer, the time of the long
days and the real light. Gaston Probert re-echoed his regrets, for
though he had no business with Miss Francina, whose name he yet liked,
he also wanted to see her again. They half-agreed to give up Spain--they
had after all been there before--so that Waterlow might take the girl in
hand without delay, the moment he had knocked off his present work. This
amendment broke down indeed, for other considerations came up and the
artist resigned himself to the arrangement on which the young women had
quitted him: he thought it so characteristic of their nationality that
they should settle a matter of that sort for themselves. This was
simply that they should come back in the autumn, when he should be
comparatively free: then there would be a margin and they might all take
their time. At present, before long--by the time he should be ready--the
question of the pretty one’s leaving Paris for the summer would be
sure to rise, and that would be a tiresome interruption. The pretty one
clearly liked Paris, she had no plans for the autumn and only wanted
a reason to come back about the twentieth of September. Mr. Waterlow
remarked humorously that she evidently bossed the shop. Meanwhile,
before starting for Spain, he would see her as often as possible--his
eye would take possession of her.

His companion envied his eye, even expressed jealousy of his eye. It was
perhaps as a step towards establishing his right to jealousy that Mr.
Probert left a card upon the Miss Dossons at the Hotel de l’Univers et
de Cheltenham, having first ascertained that such a proceeding would
not, by the young American sisters, be regarded as an unwarrantable
liberty. Gaston Probert was an American who had never been in America
and was obliged to take counsel on such an emergency as that. He knew
that in Paris young men didn’t call at hotels on blameless maids, but
he also knew that blameless maids, unattended by a parent, didn’t visit
young men in studios; and he had no guide, no light he could trust--none
save the wisdom of his friend Waterlow, which was for the most part
communicated to him in a derisive and misleading form. Waterlow, who
was after all himself an ornament of the French, and the very French,
school, jeered at the other’s want of native instinct, at the way he
never knew by which end to take hold of a compatriot. Poor Probert was
obliged to confess to his terrible paucity of practice, and that in
the great medley of aliens and brothers--and even more of sisters--he
couldn’t tell which was which. He would have had a country and
countrymen, to say nothing of countrywomen, if he could; but that matter
had never been properly settled for him, and it’s one there’s ever a
great difficulty in a gentleman’s settling for himself. Born in Paris,
he had been brought up altogether on French lines, in a family that
French society had irrecoverably absorbed. His father, a Carolinian
and a Catholic, was a Gallomaniac of the old American type. His three
sisters had married Frenchmen, and one of them lived in Brittany while
the others were ostensibly seated in Touraine. His only brother had
fallen, during the Terrible Year, in defence of their adopted country.
Yet Gaston, though he had had an old Legitimist marquis for godfather,
was not legally one of its children; his mother had, on her death-bed,
extorted from him the promise that he wouldn’t take service in its
armies; she considered, after the death of her elder son--Gaston, in
1870, had been a boy of ten--that the family had sacrificed enough on
the altar of sympathy.

The young man therefore, between two stools, had no clear sitting-place:
he wanted to be as American as he could and yet not less French than he
was; he was afraid to give up the little that he was and find that what
he might be was less--he shrank from a flying leap which might drop him
in the middle of the sea. At the same time he thought himself sure that
the only way to know how it feels to be an American is to try it, and
he had had many a purpose of making the pious pilgrimage. His family
however had been so completely Gallicised that the affairs of each
member of it were the affairs of all the rest, and his father, his
sisters and his brothers-in-law had not yet begun sufficiently to regard
this scheme as their own for him to feel it substantially his. It was a
family in which there was no individual but only a collective property.
Meanwhile he tried, as I say, by affronting minor perils, and especially
by going a good deal to see Charles Waterlow in the Avenue de Villiers,
whom he believed to be his dearest friend, formed for his affection by
Monsieur Carolus. He had an idea that in this manner he kept himself
in touch with his countrymen; and he had never pitched his endeavour so
high as in leaving that card on the Misses Dosson. He was in search of
freshness, but he needn’t have gone far: he would have had but to turn
his lantern on his own young breast to find a considerable store of it.
Like many of his dawdling coaevals he gave much attention to art, lived
as much as possible in that more select world where it is a positive
duty not to bustle. To make up for his want of talent he espoused
the talent of others--that is of several--and was as sensitive and
conscientious about them as he might have been about himself. He
defended certain of Waterlow’s purples and greens as he would have
defended his own honour, and there was a genius or two, not yet fully
acclaimed by the vulgar, in regard to whom he had convictions that
belonged almost to the undiscussable part of life. He had not, for
himself, any very high sense of performance, but what kept it down
particularly was his untractable hand, the fact that, such as they were,
Waterlow’s purples and greens, for instance, were far beyond him. If he
hadn’t failed there other failures wouldn’t have mattered, not even
that of not having a country; and it was on the occasion of his friend’s
agreement to paint that strange lovely girl, whom he liked so much
and whose companions he didn’t like, that he felt supremely without a
vocation. Freshness was in HER at least, if he had only been organised
for catching it. He prayed earnestly, in relation to such a triumph,
for a providential re-enforcement of Waterlow’s sense of that source
of charm. If Waterlow had a fault it was that his freshnesses were
sometimes too crude.

He avenged himself for the artist’s profanation of his first attempt
to approach Miss Francie by indulging at the end of another week in
a second. He went about six o’clock, when he supposed she would have
returned from her day’s wanderings, and his prudence was rewarded by
the sight of the young lady sitting in the court of the hotel with her
father and sister. Mr. Dosson was new to Gaston Probert, but the young
man might have been a naturalist visiting a rank country with a net of
such narrow meshes as to let no creature of the air escape. The little
party was as usual expecting Mr. Flack at any moment, and they had
collected downstairs, so that he might pick them up easily. They had, on
the first floor, an expensive parlour, decorated in white and gold, with
sofas of crimson damask; but there was something lonely in that grandeur
and the place had become mainly a receptacle for their tall trunks, with
a half-emptied paper of chocolates or marrons glaces on every table.
After young Probert’s first call his name was often on the lips of the
simple trio, and Mr. Dosson grew still more jocose, making nothing of a
secret of his perception that Francie hit the bull’s-eye “every time.”
 Mr. Waterlow had returned their visit, but that was rather a matter
of course, since it was they who had gone after him. They had not gone
after the other one; it was he who had come after them. When he entered
the hotel, as they sat there, this pursuit and its probable motive
became startlingly vivid.

Delia had taken the matter much more seriously than her father; she
said there was ever so much she wanted to find out. She mused upon
these mysteries visibly, but with no great advance, and she appealed
for assistance to George Flack, with a candour which he appreciated and
returned. If he really knew anything he ought to know at least who Mr.
Probert was; and she spoke as if it would be in the natural course that
as soon as he should find out he would put it for them somehow into his
paper. Mr. Flack promised to “nose round”; he said the best plan would
be that the results should “come back” to her in the Reverberator; it
might have been gathered from him that “the people over there”--in other
words the mass of their compatriots--wouldn’t be unpersuadable that they
wanted about a column on Mr. Probert. His researches were to prove none
the less fruitless, for in spite of the vivid fact the girl was able to
give him as a starting-point, the fact that their new acquaintance had
spent his whole life in Paris, the young journalist couldn’t scare up a
single person who had even heard of him. He had questioned up and down
and all over the place, from the Rue Scribe to the far end of Chaillot,
and he knew people who knew others who knew every member of the
American colony; that select settled body, which haunted poor Delia’s
imagination, glittered and re-echoed there in a hundred tormenting
roundabout glimpses. That was where she wanted to “get” Francie, as she
said to herself; she wanted to get her right in there. She believed the
members of this society to constitute a little kingdom of the blest; and
she used to drive through the Avenue Gabriel, the Rue de Marignan and
the wide vistas which radiate from the Arch of Triumph and are always
changing their names, on purpose to send up wistful glances to the
windows--she had learned that all this was the happy quarter--of the
enviable but unapproachable colonists. She saw these privileged mortals,
as she supposed, in almost every victoria that made a languid lady with
a pretty head dash past her, and she had no idea how little honour this
theory sometimes did her expatriated countrywomen. Her plan was already
made to be on the field again the next winter and take it up seriously,
this question of getting Francie in.

When Mr. Flack remarked that young Probert’s net couldn’t be either the
rose or anything near it, since they had shed no petal, at any general
shake, on the path of the oldest inhabitant, Delia had a flash of
inspiration, an intellectual flight that she herself didn’t measure at
the time. She asked if that didn’t perhaps prove on the contrary quite
the opposite--that they were just THE cream and beyond all others.
Wasn’t there a kind of inner, very FAR in, circle, and wouldn’t they be
somewhere about the centre of that? George Flack almost quivered at
this weird hit as from one of the blind, for he guessed on the spot that
Delia Dosson had, as he would have said, got there.

“Why, do you mean one of those families that have worked down so far
you can’t find where they went in?”--that was the phrase in which he
recognised the truth of the girl’s grope. Delia’s fixed eyes assented,
and after a moment of cogitation George Flack broke out: “That’s the
kind of family we want to handle!”

“Well, perhaps they won’t want to be handled,” Delia had returned with
a still wilder and more remarkable play of inspiration. “You had better
find out,” she had added.

The chance to find out might have seemed to present itself after Mr.
Probert had walked in that confiding way into the hotel; for his
arrival had been followed a quarter of an hour later by that of the
representative of the Reverberator. Gaston had liked the way they
treated him--though demonstrative it was not artificial. Mr. Dosson
had said they had been hoping he would come round again, and Delia had
remarked that she supposed he had had quite a journey--Paris was so
big; and had urged his acceptance of a glass of wine or a cup of tea.
Mentioning that that wasn’t the place where they usually received--she
liked to hear herself talk of “receiving”--she led the party up to her
white-and-gold saloon, where they should be so much more private: she
liked also to hear herself talk of privacy. They sat on the red silk
chairs and she hoped Mr. Probert would at least taste a sugared chestnut
or a chocolate; and when he declined, pleading the imminence of the
dinner-hour, she sighed: “Well, I suppose you’re so used to them--to the
best--living so long over here.” The allusion to the dinner-hour led
Mr. Dosson to the frank hope that he would go round and dine with them
without ceremony; they were expecting a friend--he generally settled it
for them--who was coming to take them round.

“And then we’re going to the circus,” Francie said, speaking for the
first time.

If she had not spoken before she had done something still more to the
purpose; she had removed any shade of doubt that might have lingered in
the young man’s spirit as to her charm of line. He was aware that the
education of Paris, acting upon a natural aptitude, had opened him
much--rendered him perhaps even morbidly sensitive--to impressions of
this order; the society of artists, the talk of studios, the attentive
study of beautiful works, the sight of a thousand forms of curious
research and experiment, had produced in his mind a new sense,
the exercise of which was a conscious enjoyment and the supreme
gratification of which, on several occasions, had given him as many
indelible memories. He had once said to his friend Waterlow: “I don’t
know whether it’s a confession of a very poor life, but the most
important things that have happened to me in this world have been simply
half a dozen visual impressions--things that happened through my eyes.”

“Ah malheureux, you’re lost!” the painter had exclaimed in answer to
this, and without even taking the trouble to explain his ominous speech.
Gaston Probert however had not been frightened by it, and he continued
to be thankful for the sensitive plate that nature had lodged in his
brain and that culture had brought to so high a polish. The experience
of the eye was doubtless not everything, but it was so much gained, so
much saved, in a world in which other treasures were apt to slip through
one’s fingers; and above all it had the merit that so many things gave
it and that nothing could take it away. He had noted in a moment how
straight Francie Dosson gave it; and now, seeing her a second time, he
felt her promote it in a degree which made acquaintance with her one of
those “important” facts of which he had spoken to Charles Waterlow. It
was in the case of such an accident as this that he felt the value of
his Parisian education. It made him revel in his modern sense.

It was therefore not directly the prospect of the circus that induced
him to accept Mr. Dosson’s invitation; nor was it even the charm exerted
by the girl’s appearing, in the few words she uttered, to appeal to him
for herself. It was his feeling that on the edge of the glittering ring
her type would attach him to her, to her only, and that if he knew it
was rare she herself didn’t. He liked to be intensely conscious, but
liked others not to be. It seemed to him at this moment, after he had
told Mr. Dosson he should be delighted to spend the evening with them,
that he was indeed trying hard to measure how it would feel to recover
the national tie; he had jumped on the ship, he was pitching away to the
west. He had led his sister, Mme. de Brecourt, to expect that he would
dine with her--she was having a little party; so that if she could see
the people to whom, without a scruple, with a quick sense of refreshment
and freedom, he now sacrificed her! He knew who was coming to his
sister’s in the Place Beauvau: Mme. d’Outreville and M. de Grospre, old
M. Courageau, Mme. de Drives, Lord and Lady Trantum, Mile de Saintonge;
but he was fascinated by the idea of the contrast between what he
preferred and what he gave up. His life had long been wanting--painfully
wanting--in the element of contrast, and here was a chance to bring it
in. He saw it come in powerfully with Mr. Flack, after Miss Dosson had
proposed they should walk off without their initiator. Her father didn’t
favour this suggestion; he said “We want a double good dinner to-day and
Mr. Flack has got to order it.” Upon this Delia had asked the visitor
if HE couldn’t order--a Frenchman like him; and Francie had interrupted,
before he could answer the question, “Well, ARE you a Frenchman? That’s
just the point, ain’t it?” Gaston Probert replied that he had no wish
but to be a citizen of HER country, and the elder sister asked him if he
knew many Americans in Paris. He was obliged to confess he knew almost
none, but hastened to add he was eager to go on now he had taken such a
charming start.

“Oh we ain’t anything--if you mean that,” Delia said. “If you go on
you’ll go on beyond us.”

“We ain’t anything here, my dear, but we’re a good deal at home,” Mr.
Dosson jocosely interjected.

“I think we’re very nice anywhere!” Francie exclaimed; upon which Gaston
Probert declared that they were as delightful as possible. It was in
these amenities that George Flack found them engaged; but there was none
the less a certain eagerness in his greeting of the other guest, as if
he had it in mind to ask him how soon he could give him half an hour.
I hasten to add that with the turn the occasion presently took the
correspondent of the Reverberator dropped the conception of making the
young man “talk” for the benefit of the subscribers to that journal.
They all went out together, and the impulse to pick up something,
usually so irresistible in George Flack’s mind, suffered an odd check.
He found himself wanting to handle his fellow visitor in a sense other
than the professional. Mr. Probert talked very little to Francie, but
though Mr. Flack didn’t know that on a first occasion he would have
thought this aggressive, even rather brutal, he knew it was for Francie,
and Francie alone, that the fifth member of the party was there. He said
to himself suddenly and in perfect sincerity that it was a mean class
anyway, the people for whom their own country wasn’t good enough.
He didn’t go so far, however, when they were seated at the admirable
establishment of M. Durand in the Place de la Madeleine, as to order
a bad dinner to spite his competitor; nor did he, to spoil this
gentleman’s amusement, take uncomfortable seats at the pretty circus in
the Champs Elysees to which, at half-past eight o’clock, the company was
conveyed--it was a drive of but five minutes--in a couple of cabs. The
occasion therefore was superficially smooth, and he could see that the
sense of being disagreeable to an American newspaper-man was not needed
to make his nondescript rival enjoy it. That gentleman did indeed hate
his crude accent and vulgar laugh and above all the lamblike submission
to him of their friends. Mr. Flack was acute enough for an important
observation: he cherished it and promised himself to bring it to the
notice of his clinging charges. Their imperturbable guest professed a
great desire to be of service to the young ladies--to do what would help
them to be happy in Paris; but he gave no hint of the intention that
would contribute most to such a result, the bringing them in contact
with the other members, especially with the female members, of his
family. George Flack knew nothing about the matter, but he required
for purposes of argument that Mr. Probert’s family should have female
members, and it was lucky for him that his assumption was just. He
grasped in advance the effect with which he should impress it on Francie
and Delia--but notably on Delia, who would then herself impress it on
Francie--that it would be time for their French friend to talk when he
had brought his mother round. BUT HE NEVER WOULD--they might bet their
pile on that! He never did, in the strange sequel--having, poor young
man, no mother to bring. Moreover he was quite mum--as Delia phrased it
to herself--about Mme. de Brecourt and Mme. de Cliche: such, Miss Dosson
learned from Charles Waterlow, were the names of his two sisters who had
houses in Paris--gleaning at the same time the information that one
of these ladies was a marquise and the other a comtesse. She was less
exasperated by their non-appearance than Mr. Flack had hoped, and it
didn’t prevent an excursion to dine at Saint-Germain a week after the
evening spent at the circus, which included both the new admirers. It
also as a matter of course included Mr. Flack, for though the party had
been proposed in the first instance by Charles Waterlow, who wished to
multiply opportunities for studying his future sitter, Mr. Dosson had
characteristically constituted himself host and administrator, with the
young journalist as his deputy. He liked to invite people and to pay
for them, and disliked to be invited and paid for. He was never inwardly
content on any occasion unless a great deal of money was spent, and he
could be sure enough of the large amount only when he himself spent it.
He was too simple for conceit or for pride of purse, but always felt
any arrangements shabby and sneaking as to which the expense hadn’t been
referred to him. He never named what he paid for anything. Also Delia
had made him understand that if they should go to Saint-Germain as
guests of the artist and his friend Mr. Flack wouldn’t be of the
company: she was sure those gentlemen wouldn’t rope HIM in. In fact
she was too sure, for, though enjoying him not at all, Charles Waterlow
would on this occasion have made a point of expressing by an act of
courtesy his sense of obligation to a man who had brought him such a
subject. Delia’s hint however was all-sufficient for her father; he
would have thought it a gross breach of friendly loyalty to take part in
a festival not graced by Mr. Flack’s presence. His idea of loyalty was
that he should scarcely smoke a cigar unless his friend was there to
take another, and he felt rather mean if he went round alone to get
shaved. As regards Saint-Germain he took over the project while George
Flack telegraphed for a table on the terrace at the Pavilion Henri
Quatre. Mr. Dosson had by this time learned to trust the European
manager of the Reverberator to spend his money almost as he himself
would.




IV

Delia had broken out the evening they took Mr. Probert to the circus;
she had apostrophised Francie as they each sat in a red-damask chair
after ascending to their apartments. They had bade their companions
farewell at the door of the hotel and the two gentlemen had walked
off in different directions. But upstairs they had instinctively not
separated; they dropped into the first places and sat looking at each
other and at the highly-decorated lamps that burned night after night
in their empty saloon. “Well, I want to know when you’re going to
stop,” Delia said to her sister, speaking as if this remark were a
continuation, which it was not, of something they had lately been
saying.

“Stop what?” asked Francie, reaching forward for a marron.

“Stop carrying-on the way you do--with Mr. Flack.”

Francie stared while she consumed her marron; then she replied in
her small flat patient voice: “Why, Delia Dosson, how can you be so
foolish?”

“Father, I wish you’d speak to her. Francie, I ain’t foolish,” Delia
submitted.

“What do you want me to say to her?” Mr. Dosson enquired. “I guess I’ve
said about all I know.”

“Well, that’s in fun. I want you to speak to her in earnest.”

“I guess there’s no one in earnest but you,” Francie remarked. “These
ain’t so good as the last.”

“NO, and there won’t be if you don’t look out. There’s something you
can do if you’ll just keep quiet. If you can’t tell difference of style,
well, I can!” Delia cried.

“What’s the difference of style?” asked Mr. Dosson. But before this
question could be answered Francie protested against the charge of
“carrying-on.” Quiet? Wasn’t she as quiet as a Quaker meeting? Delia
replied that a girl wasn’t quiet so long as she didn’t keep others so;
and she wanted to know what her sister proposed to do about Mr. Flack.
“Why don’t you take him and let Francie take the other?” Mr. Dosson
continued.

“That’s just what I’m after--to make her take the other,” said his elder
daughter.

“Take him--how do you mean?” Francie returned.

“Oh you know how.”

“Yes, I guess you know how!” Mr. Dosson laughed with an absence of
prejudice that might have been deplored in a parent.

“Do you want to stay in Europe or not? that’s what _I_ want to know,”
 Delia pursued to her sister. “If you want to go bang home you’re taking
the right way to do it.”

“What has that got to do with it?” Mr. Dosson audibly wondered.

“Should you like so much to reside at that place--where is it?--where
his paper’s published? That’s where you’ll have to pull up sooner or
later,” Delia declaimed.

“Do you want to stay right here in Europe, father?” Francie said with
her small sweet weariness.

“It depends on what you mean by staying right here. I want to go right
home SOME time.”

“Well then you’ve got to go without Mr. Probert,” Delia made answer with
decision. “If you think he wants to live over there--”

“Why Delia, he wants dreadfully to go--he told me so himself,” Francie
argued with passionless pauses.

“Yes, and when he gets there he’ll want to come back. I thought you were
so much interested in Paris.”

“My poor child, I AM interested!” smiled Francie. “Ain’t I interested,
father?”

“Well, I don’t know how you could act differently to show it.”

“Well, I do then,” said Delia. “And if you don’t make Mr. Flack
understand _I_ will.”

“Oh I guess he understands--he’s so bright,” Francie vaguely pleaded.

“Yes, I guess he does--he IS bright,” said Mr. Dosson. “Good-night,
chickens,” he added; and wandered off to a couch of untroubled repose.

His daughters sat up half an hour later, but not by the wish of the
younger girl. She was always passive, however, always docile when
Delia was, as she said, on the war-path, and though she had none of her
sister’s insistence she was courageous in suffering. She thought Delia
whipped her up too much, but there was that in her which would have
prevented her ever running away. She could smile and smile for an hour
without irritation, making even pacific answers, though all the while
it hurt her to be heavily exhorted, much as it would have done to be
violently pushed. She knew Delia loved her--not loving herself meanwhile
a bit--as no one else in the world probably ever would; but there was
something funny in such plans for her--plans of ambition which could
only involve a “fuss.” The real answer to anything, to everything her
sister might say at these hours of urgency was: “Oh if you want to make
out that people are thinking of me or that they ever will, you ought to
remember that no one can possibly think of me half as much as you do.
Therefore if there’s to be any comfort for either of us we had both much
better just go on as we are.” She didn’t however on this occasion meet
her constant companion with that syllogism, because a formidable force
seemed to lurk in the great contention that the star of matrimony for
the American girl was now shining in the east--in England and France
and Italy. They had only to look round anywhere to see it: what did
they hear of every day in the week but of the engagement of somebody no
better than they to some count or some lord? Delia dwelt on the evident
truth that it was in that vast vague section of the globe to which she
never alluded save as “over here” that the American girl was now called
upon to play, under providence, her part. When Francie made the point
that Mr. Probert was neither a count nor a lord her sister rejoined that
she didn’t care whether he was or not. To this Francie replied that she
herself didn’t care, but that Delia ought to for consistency.

“Well, he’s a prince compared with Mr. Flack,” Delia declared.

“He hasn’t the same ability; not half.”

“He has the ability to have three sisters who are just the sort of
people I want you to know.”

“What good will they do me?” Francie asked. “They’ll hate me. Before
they could turn round I should do something--in perfect innocence--that
they’d think monstrous.”

“Well, what would that matter if HE liked you?”

“Oh but he wouldn’t then! He’d hate me too.”

“Then all you’ve got to do is not to do it,” Delia concluded.

“Oh but I should--every time,” her sister went on.

Delia looked at her a moment. “What ARE you talking about?”

“Yes, what am I? It’s disgusting!” And Francie sprang up.

“I’m sorry you have such thoughts,” said Delia sententiously.

“It’s disgusting to talk about a gentleman--and his sisters and his
society and everything else--before he has scarcely looked at you.”

“It’s disgusting if he isn’t just dying; but it isn’t if he is.”

“Well, I’ll make him skip!” Francie went on with a sudden approach to
sharpness.

“Oh you’re worse than father!” her sister cried, giving her a push as
they went to bed.

They reached Saint-Germain with their companions nearly an hour before
the time it had been agreed they had best dine; the purpose of this
being to enable them to enjoy with what remained of daylight a stroll on
the celebrated terrace and a study of the magnificent view. The evening
was splendid and the atmosphere favourable to these impressions; the
grass was vivid on the broad walk beside the parapet, the park and
forest were fresh and leafy and the prettiest golden light hung over
the curving Seine and the far-spreading city. The hill which forms the
terrace stretched down among the vineyards, with the poles delicate yet
in their bareness, to the river, and the prospect was spotted here
and there with the red legs of the little sauntering soldiers of
the garrison. How it came, after Delia’s warning in regard to her
carrying-on--especially as she hadn’t failed to feel the weight of her
sister’s wisdom--Francie couldn’t have told herself: certain it is that
before ten minutes had elapsed she became aware, first, that the evening
wouldn’t pass without Mr. Flack’s taking in some way, and for a certain
time, peculiar possession of her; and then that he was already doing so,
that he had drawn her away from the others, who were stopping behind to
appreciate the view, that he made her walk faster, and that he had ended
by interposing such a distance that she was practically alone with him.
This was what he wanted, but it was not all; she saw he now wanted a
great many other things. The large perspective of the terrace stretched
away before them--Mr. Probert had said it was in the grand style--and
he was determined to make her walk to the end. She felt sorry for his
ideas--she thought of them in the light of his striking energy; they
were an idle exercise of a force intrinsically fine, and she wanted to
protest, to let him know how truly it was a sad misuse of his free bold
spirit to count on her. She was not to be counted on; she was a vague
soft negative being who had never decided anything and never would, who
had not even the merit of knowing how to flirt and who only asked to
be let alone. She made him stop at last, telling him, while she leaned
against the parapet, that he walked too fast; and she looked back at
their companions, whom she expected to see, under pressure from Delia,
following at the highest speed. But they were not following; they still
stood together there, only looking, attentively enough, at the couple
who had left them. Delia would wave a parasol, beckon her back, send Mr.
Waterlow to bring her; Francie invoked from one moment to another some
such appeal as that. But no appeal came; none at least but the odd
spectacle, presently, of an agitation of the group, which, evidently
under Delia’s direction, turned round and retraced its steps. Francie
guessed in a moment what was meant by that; it was the most definite
signal her sister could have given. It made her feel that Delia counted
on her, but to such a different end, just as poor Mr. Flack did, just as
Delia wished to persuade her that Mr. Probert did. The girl gave a sigh,
looking up with troubled eyes at her companion and at the figure of
herself as the subject of contending policies. Such a thankless bored
evasive little subject as she felt herself! What Delia had said in
turning away was--“Yes, I’m watching you, and I depend on you to finish
him up. Stay there with him, go off with him--I’ll allow you half an
hour if necessary: only settle him once for all. It’s very kind of me
to give you this chance, and in return for it I expect you to be able to
tell me this evening that he has his answer. Shut him up!”

Francie didn’t in the least dislike Mr. Flack. Interested as I am in
presenting her favourably to the reader I am yet obliged as a veracious
historian to admit that she believed him as “bright” as her father had
originally pronounced him and as any young man she was likely to
meet. She had no other measure for distinction in young men but their
brightness; she had never been present at any imputation of ability or
power that this term didn’t seem to cover. In many a girl so great a
kindness might have been fanned to something of a flame by the breath of
close criticism. I probably exaggerate little the perversity of pretty
girls in saying that our young woman might at this moment have answered
her sister with: “No, I wasn’t in love with him, but somehow, since
you’re so very disgusted, I foresee that I shall be if he presses
me.” It is doubtless difficult to say more for Francie’s simplicity of
character than that she felt no need of encouraging Mr. Flack in order
to prove to herself that she wasn’t bullied. She didn’t care whether
she were bullied or not, and she was perfectly capable of letting Delia
believe her to have carried mildness to the point of giving up a man
she had a secret sentiment for in order to oblige a relative who
fairly brooded with devotion. She wasn’t clear herself as to whether it
mightn’t be so; her pride, what she had of it, lay in an undistributed
inert form quite at the bottom of her heart, and she had never yet
thought of a dignified theory to cover her want of uppishness. She felt
as she looked up at Mr. Flack that she didn’t care even if he should
think she sacrificed him to a childish docility. His bright eyes were
hard, as if he could almost guess how cynical she was, and she turned
her own again toward her retreating companions. “They’re going to
dinner; we oughtn’t to be dawdling here,” she said.

“Well, if they’re going to dinner they’ll have to eat the napkins.
I ordered it and I know when it’ll be ready,” George Flack answered.
“Besides, they’re not going to dinner, they’re going to walk in the
park. Don’t you worry, we shan’t lose them. I wish we could!” the young
man added in his boldest gayest manner.

“You wish we could?”

“I should like to feel you just under my particular protection and no
other.”

“Well, I don’t know what the dangers are,” said Francie, setting herself
in motion again. She went after the others, but at the end of a few
steps he stopped her again.

“You won’t have confidence. I wish you’d believe what I tell you.”

“You haven’t told me anything.” And she turned her back to him, looking
away at the splendid view. “I do love the scenery,” she added in a
moment.

“Well, leave it alone a little--it won’t run away! I want to tell
you something about myself, if I could flatter myself you’d take any
interest in it.” He had thrust the raised point of his cane into the low
wall of the terrace, and he leaned on the knob, screwing the other end
gently round with both hands.

“I’ll take an interest if I can understand,” said Francie.

“You can understand right enough if you’ll try. I got to-day some news
from America,” he went on, “that I like awfully. The Reverberator has
taken a jump.”

This was not what Francie had expected, but it was better. “Taken a
jump?”

“It has gone straight up. It’s in the second hundred thousand.”

“Hundred thousand dollars?” said Francie.

“No, Miss Francie, copies. That’s the circulation. But the dollars are
footing up too.”

“And do they all come to you?”

“Precious few of them! I wish they did. It’s a sweet property.”

“Then it isn’t yours?” she asked, turning round to him. It was an
impulse of sympathy that made her look at him now, for she already knew
how much he had the success of his newspaper at heart. He had once told
her he loved the Reverberator as he had loved his first jack-knife.

“Mine? You don’t mean to say you suppose I own it!” George Flack
shouted. The light projected upon her innocence by his tone was so
strong that the girl blushed, and he went on more tenderly: “It’s a
pretty sight, the way you and your sister take that sort of thing for
granted. Do you think property grows on you like a moustache? Well,
it seems as if it had, on your father. If I owned the Reverberator I
wouldn’t be stumping round here; I’d give my attention to another branch
of the business. That is I’d give my attention to all, but I wouldn’t
go round with the delivery-cart. Still, I’m going to capture the blamed
thing, and I want you to help me,” the young man went on; “that’s
just what I wanted to speak to you about. It’s a big proposition as it
stands, but I mean to make it bigger: the most universal society-paper
the world has seen. That’s where the future lies, and the man who sees
it first is the man who’ll make his pile. It’s a field for enlightened
enterprise that hasn’t yet begun to be worked.” He continued, glowing
as if on a sudden with his idea, and one of his knowing eyes half-closed
itself for an emphasis habitual with him when he talked consecutively.
The effect of this would have been droll to a listener, the note of the
prospectus mingling with the question of his more intimate hope. But it
was not droll to Francie; she only thought it, or supposed it, a proof
of the way Mr. Flack saw everything on a stupendous scale. “There are
ten thousand things to do that haven’t been done, and I’m going to do
them. The society-news of every quarter of the globe, furnished by the
prominent members themselves--oh THEY can be fixed, you’ll see!--from
day to day and from hour to hour and served up hot at every
breakfast-table in the United States: that’s what the American people
want and that’s what the American people are going to have. I wouldn’t
say it to every one, but I don’t mind telling you, that I consider my
guess as good as the next man’s on what’s going to be required in
future over there. I’m going for the inside view, the choice bits, the
chronique intime, as they say here; what the people want’s just what
ain’t told, and I’m going to tell it. Oh they’re bound to have the
plums! That’s about played out, anyway, the idea of sticking up a sign
of ‘private’ and ‘hands off’ and ‘no thoroughfare’ and thinking you can
keep the place to yourself. You ain’t going to be able any longer to
monopolise any fact of general interest, and it ain’t going to be
right you should; it ain’t going to continue to be possible to keep out
anywhere the light of the Press. Now what I’m going to do is to set up
the biggest lamp yet made and make it shine all over the place. We’ll
see who’s private then, and whose hands are off, and who’ll frustrate
the People--the People THAT WANTS TO KNOW. That’s a sign of the American
people that they DO want to know, and it’s the sign of George P. Flack,”
 the young man pursued with a rising spirit, “that he’s going to help
them. But I’ll make the touchy folks crowd in THEMSELVES with their
information, and as I tell you, Miss Francie, it’s a job in which you
can give me a lovely lift.”

“Well, I don’t see how,” said Francie candidly. “I haven’t got any
choice bits or any facts of general interest.” She spoke gaily because
she was relieved; she thought she had in truth a glimpse of what he
wanted of her. It was something better than she had feared. Since he
didn’t own the great newspaper--her view of such possibilities was of
the dimmest--he desired to possess himself of it, and she sufficiently
grasped the idea that money was needed for that. She further seemed to
make out that he presented himself to her, that he hovered about her
and pressed on her, as moneyless, and that this brought them round by
a vague but comfortable transition to a helpful remembrance that her
father was not. The remaining divination, silently achieved, was quick
and happy: she should acquit herself by asking her father for the sum
required and by just passing it on to Mr. Flack. The grandeur of his
enterprise and the force of his reasoning appeared to overshadow her as
they stood there. This was a delightful simplification and it didn’t for
the moment strike her as positively unnatural that her companion should
have a delicacy about appealing to Mr. Dosson directly for financial
aid, though indeed she would have been capable of thinking that odd had
she meditated on it. There was nothing simpler to Francie than the idea
of putting her hand into her father’s pocket, and she felt that even
Delia would be glad to appease their persecutor by this casual gesture.
I must add unfortunately that her alarm came back to her from his look
as he replied: “Do you mean to say you don’t know, after all I’ve done?”

“I’m sure I don’t know what you’ve done.”

“Haven’t I tried--all I know--to make you like me?”

“Oh dear, I do like you!” cried Francie; “but how will that help you?”

“It will help me if you’ll understand how I love you.”

“Well, I won’t understand!” replied the girl as she walked off.

He followed her; they went on together in silence and then he said: “Do
you mean to say you haven’t found that out?”

“Oh I don’t find things out--I ain’t an editor!” Francie gaily quavered.

“You draw me out and then you gibe at me,” Mr. Flack returned.

“I didn’t draw you out. Why, couldn’t you see me just strain to get
away?”

“Don’t you sympathise then with my ideas?”

“Of course I do, Mr. Flack; I think your ideas splendid,” said Francie,
who hadn’t in the least taken them in.

“Well then why won’t you work with me? Your affection, your brightness,
your faith--to say nothing of your matchless beauty--would be everything
to me.”

“I’m very sorry, but I can’t, I can’t!” she protested.

“You could if you would, quick enough.”

“Well then I won’t!” And as soon as these words were spoken, as if to
mitigate something of their asperity, she made her other point. “You
must remember that I never said I would--nor anything like it; not one
little wee mite. I thought you just wanted me to speak to poppa.”

“Of course I supposed you’d do that,” he allowed.

“I mean about your paper.”

“About my paper?”

“So as he could give you the money--to do what you want.”

“Lord, you’re too sweet!” George Flack cried with an illumined stare.
“Do you suppose I’d ever touch a cent of your father’s money?”--a speech
not rankly hypocritical, inasmuch as the young man, who made his own
discriminations, had never been guilty, and proposed to himself never
to be, of the indelicacy of tugging at his potential father-in-law’s
purse-strings with his own hand. He had talked to Mr. Dosson by the hour
about his master-plan of making the touchy folks themselves fall
into line, but had never dreamed this man would subsidise him as an
interesting struggler. The only character in which he could expect it
would be that of Francie’s accepted suitor, and then the liberality
would have Francie and not himself for its object. This reasoning
naturally didn’t lessen his impatience to take on the happy character,
so that his love of his profession and his appreciation of the girl at
his side now ached together in his breast with the same disappointment.
She saw that her words had touched him like a lash; they made him for a
moment flush to his eyes. This caused her own colour to rise--she could
scarcely have said why--and she hurried along again. He kept close to
her; he argued with her; he besought her to think it over, assuring her
he had brains, heart and material proofs of a college education. To this
she replied that if he didn’t leave her alone she should cry--and how
would he like that, to bring her back in such a state to the others? He
answered “Damn the others!” but it didn’t help his case, and at last
he broke out: “Will you just tell me this, then--is it because you’ve
promised Miss Delia?” Francie returned that she hadn’t promised Miss
Delia anything, and her companion went on: “Of course I know what she
has got in her head: she wants to get you into the smart set--the grand
monde, as they call it here; but I didn’t suppose you’d let her fix your
life for you. You were very different before HE turned up.”

“She never fixed anything for me. I haven’t got any life and I don’t
want to have any,” Francie veraciously pleaded. “And I don’t know who
you’re talking about either!”

“The man without a country. HE’LL pass you in--that’s what your sister
wants.”

“You oughtn’t to abuse him, because it was you that presented him,” the
girl pronounced.

“I never presented him! I’d like to kick him.”

“We should never have seen him if it hadn’t been for you,” she
maintained.

“That’s a fact, but it doesn’t make me love him any better. He’s the
poorest kind there is.”

“I don’t care anything about his kind.”

“That’s a pity if you’re going to marry him right off! How could I know
that when I took you up there?”

“Good-bye, Mr. Flack,” said Francie, trying to gain ground from him.

This attempt was of course vain, and after a moment he resumed: “Will
you keep me as a friend?”

“Why Mr. Flack, OF COURSE I will!” cried the easy creature.

“All right,” he replied; and they presently overtook their companions.




V

Gaston Probert made his plan, confiding it only to his friend Waterlow
whose help indeed he needed to carry it out. These revelations cost him
something, for the ornament of the merciless school, as it might have
been called, found his predicament amusing and made no scruple of
showing it. Gaston was too much in love, however, to be upset by a bad
joke or two. This fact is the more noteworthy as he knew that Waterlow
scoffed at him for a purpose--had a view of the good to be done him
by throwing him on the defensive. The French tradition, or a grimacing
ghost of it, was in Waterlow’s “manner,” but it had not made its mark
on his view of the relations of a young man of spirit with parents and
pastors. He mixed his colours, as might have been said, with the general
sense of France, but his early American immunities and serenities could
still swell his sail in any “vital” discussion with a friend in whose
life the principle of authority played so large a part. He accused
Probert of being afraid of his sisters, which was an effective way--and
he knew it--of alluding to the rigidity of the conception of the family
among people who had adopted and had even to Waterlow’s sense, as the
phrase is, improved upon the “Latin” ideal. That did injustice--and this
the artist also knew--to the delicate nature of the bond uniting the
different members of the house of Probert, who were each for all and all
for each. Family feeling among them was not a tyranny but a religion,
and in regard to Mesdames de Brecourt, de Cliche and de Douves what
Gaston most feared was that he might seem to them not to love them
enough. None the less Charles Waterlow, who thought he had charming
parts, held that the best way hadn’t been taken to make a man of him,
and the zeal with which the painter appeared to have proposed to repair
that mistake was founded in esteem, though it sometimes flowered in
freedom. Waterlow combined in odd fashion many of the forms of the
Parisian studio with the moral and social ideas of Brooklyn Long Island,
where the seeds of his strictness had been sown.

Gaston Probert desired nothing better than to be a man; what worried
him--and it is perhaps a proof that his instinct was gravely at
fault--was a certain vagueness as to the constituents of that character.
He should approximate more nearly, as it seemed to him, to the brute
were he to sacrifice in such an effort the decencies and pieties--holy
things all of them--in which he had been reared. It was very well for
Waterlow to say that to be a “real” man it was necessary to be a little
of a brute; his friend was willing, in theory, to assent even to that.
The difficulty was in application, in practice--as to which the painter
declared that all would be easy if such account hadn’t to be taken of
the marquise, the comtesse and--what was the other one?--the princess.
These young amenities were exchanged between the pair--while Gaston
explained, almost as eagerly as if he were scoring a point, that the
other one was only a baronne--during that brief journey to Spain of
which mention has already been made, during the later weeks of the
summer, after their return (the friends then spent a fortnight together
on the coast of Brittany), and above all during the autumn, when they
were settled in Paris for the winter, when Mr. Dosson had reappeared,
according to the engagement with his daughters, when the sittings for
the portrait had multiplied (the painter was unscrupulous as to the
number he demanded), and the work itself, born under a happy star,
seemed to take more and more the turn of a great thing. It was at
Granada that Gaston had really broken out; there, one balmy night, he
had dropped into his comrade’s ear that he would marry Francina Dosson
or would never marry at all. The declaration was the more striking as
it had come after such an interval; many days had elapsed since their
separation from the young lady and many new and beautiful objects
appealed to them. It appeared that the smitten youth had been thinking
of her all the while, and he let his friend know that it was the dinner
at Saint-Germain that had finished him. What she had been there Waterlow
himself had seen: he wouldn’t controvert the lucid proposition that she
showed a “cutting” equal to any Greek gem.

In November, in Paris--it was months and weeks before the artist began
to please himself--Gaston came often to the Avenue de Villiers toward
the end of a sitting and, till it was finished, not to disturb the
lovely model, cultivated conversation with the elder sister: the
representative of the Proberts was capable of that. Delia was always
there of course, but Mr. Dosson had not once turned up and the
newspaper-man happily appeared to have faded from view. The new aspirant
learned in fact from Miss Dosson that a crisis in the history of his
journal had recalled Mr. Flack to the seat of that publication. When the
young ladies had gone--and when he didn’t go with them; he accompanied
them not rarely--the visitor was almost lyrical in his appreciation of
his friend’s work; he had no jealousy of the act of appropriation that
rendered possible in its turn such an act of handing over, of which the
canvas constituted the field. He was sure Waterlow painted the girl too
well to be in love with her and that if he himself could have dealt with
her in that fashion he mightn’t have wanted to deal in any other. She
bloomed there on the easel with all the purity of life, and the artist
had caught the very secret of her beauty. It was exactly the way in
which her lover would have chosen to see her shown, and yet it had
required a perfectly independent hand. Gaston mused on this mystery and
somehow felt proud of the picture and responsible for it, though it
was no more his property as yet than the young lady herself. When in
December he put before Waterlow his plan of campaign the latter made
a comment. “I’ll do anything in the world you like--anything you think
will help you--but it passes me, my dear fellow, why in the world you
don’t go to them and say: ‘I’ve seen a girl who is as good as cake and
pretty as fire, she exactly suits me, I’ve taken time to think of it
and I know what I want; therefore I propose to make her my wife. If you
happen to like her so much the better; if you don’t be so good as to
keep it to yourselves.’ That’s much the most excellent way. Why in the
name of goodness all these mysteries and machinations?”

“Oh you don’t understand, you don’t understand!” sighed Gaston, who had
never pulled so long a face. “One can’t break with one’s traditions
in an hour, especially when there’s so much in them that one likes. I
shan’t love her more if they like her, but I shall love THEM more, and
I care about that. You talk as a man who has nothing to consider. I’ve
everything to consider--and I’m glad I have. My pleasure in marrying
her will be double if my father and my sisters accept her, and I shall
greatly enjoy working out the business of bringing them round.”

There were moments when Charles Waterlow resented the very vocabulary
of his friend; he hated to hear a man talk about the “acceptance” by any
one but himself of the woman he loved. One’s own acceptance--of one’s
bliss--in such a case ended the matter, and the effort to bring round
those who gave her the cold shoulder was scarcely consistent with the
highest spirit. Young Probert explained that of course he felt his
relatives would only have to know Francina to like her, to delight
in her, yet also that to know her they would first have to make her
acquaintance. This was the delicate point, for social commerce with such
malheureux as Mr. Dosson and Delia was not in the least in their
usual line and it was impossible to disconnect the poor girl from
her appendages. Therefore the whole question must be approached by an
oblique movement--it would never do to march straight up. The wedge
should have a narrow end, which Gaston now made sure he had found. His
sister Susan was another name for this subtle engine; he would break
her in first and she would help him to break in the others. She was
his favourite relation, his intimate friend--the most modern, the most
Parisian and inflammable member of the family. She had no suite dans
les idees, but she had perceptions, had imagination and humour, and was
capable of generosity, of enthusiasm and even of blind infatuation. She
had in fact taken two or three plunges of her own and ought to allow for
those of others. She wouldn’t like the Dossons superficially any better
than his father or than Margaret or than Jane--he called these ladies by
their English names, but for themselves, their husbands, their friends
and each other they were Suzanne, Marguerite and Jeanne; but there was
a good chance of his gaining her to his side. She was as fond of
beauty and of the arts as he--this was one of their bonds of union. She
appreciated highly Charles Waterlow’s talent and there had been talk of
her deciding to sit to him. It was true her husband viewed the project
with so much colder an eye that it had not been carried out.

According to Gaston’s plan she was to come to the Avenue de Villiers to
see what the artist had done for Miss Francie; her brother was to have
worked upon her in advance by his careful rhapsodies, bearing wholly on
the achievement itself, the dazzling example of Waterlow’s powers, and
not on the young lady, whom he was not to let her know at first that he
had so much as seen. Just at the last, just before her visit, he was to
mention to her that he had met the girl--at the studio--and that she was
as remarkable in her way as the picture. Seeing the picture and
hearing this, Mme. de Brecourt, as a disinterested lover of charming
impressions, and above all as an easy prey at all times to a rabid
curiosity, would express a desire also to enjoy a sight of so rare a
creature; on which Waterlow might pronounce it all arrangeable if she
would but come in some day when Miss Francie should sit. He would give
her two or three dates and Gaston would see that she didn’t let the
opportunity pass. She would return alone--this time he wouldn’t go with
her--and she would be as taken as could be hoped or needed. Everything
much depended on that, but it couldn’t fail. The girl would have to take
her, but the girl could be trusted, especially if she didn’t know who
the demonstrative French lady was, with her fine plain face, her hair
so blond as to be nearly white, her vividly red lips and protuberant
light-coloured eyes. Their host was to do no introducing and to reveal
the visitor’s identity only after she had gone. That was a condition
indeed this participant grumbled at; he called the whole business an
odious comedy, though his friend knew that if he undertook it he
would acquit himself honourably. After Mme. de Brecourt had been
captivated--the question of how Francie would be affected received
in advance no consideration--her brother would throw off the mask and
convince her that she must now work with him. Another meeting would be
managed for her with the girl--in which each would appear in her proper
character; and in short the plot would thicken.

Gaston’s forecast of his difficulties showed how finely he could
analyse; but that was not rare enough in any French connexion to make
his friend stare. He brought Suzanne de Brecourt, she was enchanted with
the portrait of the little American, and the rest of the drama began to
follow in its order. Mme. de Brecourt raved to Waterlow’s face--she had
no opinions behind people’s backs--about his mastery of his craft; she
could dispose the floral tributes of homage with a hand of practice all
her own. She was the reverse of egotistic and never spoke of herself;
her success in life sprang from a much wiser adoption of pronouns.
Waterlow, who liked her and had long wanted to paint her ugliness--it
was a gold-mine of charm--had two opinions about her: one of which was
that she knew a hundred times less than she thought, and even than her
brother thought, of what she talked about; and the other that she was
after all not such a humbug as she seemed. She passed in her family
for a rank radical, a bold Bohemian; she picked up expressions out
of newspapers and at the petits theatres, but her hands and feet were
celebrated, and her behaviour was not. That of her sisters, as well, had
never been disastrously exposed.

“But she must be charming, your young lady,” she said to Gaston while
she turned her head this way and that as she stood before Francie’s
image. “She’s a little Renaissance statuette cast in silver, something
of Jean Goujon or Germain Pilon.” The young men exchanged a glance, for
this struck them as the happiest comparison, and Gaston replied in a
detached way that the girl was well worth seeing.

He went in to have a cup of tea with his sister on the day he knew she
would have paid her second visit to the studio, and the first words she
greeted him with were: “But she’s admirable--votre petite--admirable,
admirable!” There was a lady calling in the Place Beauvau at the
moment--old Mme. d’Outreville--who naturally asked for news of the
object of such enthusiasm. Gaston suffered Susan to answer all questions
and was attentive to her account of the new beauty. She described his
young friend almost as well as he would have done, from the point of
view of her type, her graces, her plastic value, using various technical
and critical terms to which the old lady listened in silence, solemnly,
rather coldly, as if she thought such talk much of a galimatias:
she belonged to the old-fashioned school and held a pretty person
sufficiently catalogued when it had been said she had a dazzling
complexion or the finest eyes in the world.

“Qu’est-ce que c’est que cette merveille?” she enquired; to which Mme.
de Brecourt made answer that it was a little American her brother had
somewhere dug up. “And what do you propose to do with it, may one ask?”
 Mme. d’Outreville demanded, looking at Gaston with an eye that seemed to
read his secret and that brought him for half a minute to the point of
breaking out: “I propose to marry it--there!” But he contained himself,
only pleading for the present his wish to ascertain the uses to which
she was adapted; meanwhile, he added, there was nothing he so much liked
as to look at her, in the measure in which she would allow him. “Ah
that may take you far!” their visitor cried as she got up to go; and the
young man glanced at his sister to see if she too were ironic. But she
seemed almost awkwardly free from alarm; if she had been suspicious it
would have been easier to make his confession. When he came back from
accompanying their old friend Outreville to her carriage he asked her
if Waterlow’s charming sitter had known who she was and if she had been
frightened. Mme. de Brecourt stared; she evidently thought that kind
of sensibility implied an initiation--and into dangers--which a little
American accidentally encountered couldn’t possibly have. “Why should
she be frightened? She wouldn’t be even if she had known who I was; much
less therefore when I was nothing for her.”

“Oh you weren’t nothing for her!” the brooding youth declared; and when
his sister rejoined that he was trop aimable he brought out his lurking
fact. He had seen the lovely creature more often than he had mentioned;
he had particularly wished that SHE should see her. Now he wanted his
father and Jane and Margaret to do the same, and above all he wanted
them to like her even as she, Susan, liked her. He was delighted she
had been taken--he had been so taken himself. Mme. de Brecourt protested
that she had reserved her independence of judgement, and he answered
that if she thought Miss Dosson repulsive he might have expressed it in
another way. When she begged him to tell her what he was talking about
and what he wanted them all to do with the child he said: “I want you
to treat her kindly, tenderly, for such as you see her I’m thinking of
bringing her into the family.”

“Mercy on us--you haven’t proposed for her?” cried Mme. de Brecourt.

“No, but I’ve sounded her sister as to THEIR dispositions, and she tells
me that if I present myself there will be no difficulty.”

“Her sister?--the awful little woman with the big head?”

“Her head’s rather out of drawing, but it isn’t a part of the affair.
She’s very inoffensive; she would be devoted to me.”

“For heaven’s sake then keep quiet. She’s as common as a dressmaker’s
bill.”

“Not when you know her. Besides, that has nothing to do with Francie.
You couldn’t find words enough a moment ago to express that Francie’s
exquisite, and now you’ll be so good as to stick to that. Come--feel it
all; since you HAVE such a free mind.”

“Do you call her by her little name like that?” Mme. de Brecourt asked,
giving him another cup of tea.

“Only to you. She’s perfectly simple. It’s impossible to imagine
anything better. And think of the delight of having that charming object
before one’s eyes--always, always! It makes a different look-out for
life.”

Mme. Brecourt’s lively head tossed this argument as high as if she had
carried a pair of horns. “My poor child, what are you thinking of? You
can’t pick up a wife like that--the first little American that comes
along. You know I hoped you wouldn’t marry at all--what a pity I think
it for a man. At any rate if you expect us to like Miss--what’s her
name?--Miss Fancy, all I can say is we won’t. We can’t DO that sort of
thing!”

“I shall marry her then,” the young man returned, “without your leave
given!”

“Very good. But if she deprives you of our approval--you’ve always had
it, you’re used to it and depend on it, it’s a part of your life--you’ll
hate her like poison at the end of a month.”

“I don’t care then. I shall have always had my month.”

“And she--poor thing?”

“Poor thing exactly! You’ll begin to pity her, and that will make you
cultivate charity, and cultivate HER WITH it; which will then make you
find out how adorable she is. Then you’ll like her, then you’ll love
her, then you’ll see what a perfect sense for the right thing, the right
thing for ME, I’ve had, and we shall all be happy together again.”

“But how can you possibly know, with such people,” Mme. de Brecourt
demanded, “what you’ve got hold of?”

“By having a feeling for what’s really, what’s delicately good and
charming. You pretend to have it, and yet in such a case as this you
try to be stupid. Give that up; you might as well first as last, for
the girl’s an exquisite fact, she’ll PREVAIL, and it will be better to
accept her than to let her accept you.”

Mme. de Brecourt asked him if Miss Dosson had a fortune, and he said
he knew nothing about that. Her father certainly must be rich, but he
didn’t mean to ask for a penny with her. American fortunes moreover were
the last things to count upon; a truth of which they had seen too many
examples. To this his sister had replied: “Papa will never listen to
that.”

“Listen to what?”

“To your not finding out, to your not asking for settlements--comme cela
se fait.”

“Pardon me, papa will find out for himself; and he’ll know perfectly
whether to ask or whether to leave it alone. That’s the sort of thing he
does know. And he knows quite as well that I’m very difficult to place.”

“You’ll be difficult, my dear, if we lose you,” Mme. de Brecourt
laughed, “to replace!”

“Always at any rate to find a wife for. I’m neither fish nor flesh. I’ve
no country, no career, no future; I offer nothing; I bring nothing. What
position under the sun do I confer? There’s a fatuity in our talking as
if we could make grand terms. You and the others are well enough: qui
prend mari prend pays, and you’ve names about which your husbands take a
great stand. But papa and I--I ask you!”

“As a family nous sommes tres-bien,” said Mme. de Brecourt. “You know
what we are--it doesn’t need any explanation. We’re as good as anything
there is and have always been thought so. You might do anything you
like.”

“Well, I shall never like to marry--when it comes to that--a
Frenchwoman.”

“Thank you, my dear”--and Mme. de Brecourt tossed her head.

“No sister of mine’s really French,” returned the young man.

“No brother of mine’s really mad. Marry whomever you like,” Susan
went on; “only let her be the best of her kind. Let her be at least a
gentlewoman. Trust me, I’ve studied life. That’s the only thing that’s
safe.”

“Francie’s the equal of the first lady in the land.”

“With that sister--with that hat? Never--never!”

“What’s the matter with her hat?”

“The sister’s told a story. It was a document--it described them, it
classed them. And such a PATOIS as they speak!”

“My dear, her English is quite as good as yours. You don’t even know how
bad yours is,” the young man went on with assurance.

“Well, I don’t say ‘Parus’ and I never asked an Englishman to marry me.
You know what our feelings are,” his companion as ardently pursued; “our
convictions, our susceptibilities. We may be wrong, we may be hollow, we
may be pretentious, we mayn’t be able to say on what it all rests; but
there we are, and the fact’s insurmountable. It’s simply impossible for
us to live with vulgar people. It’s a defect, no doubt; it’s an immense
inconvenience, and in the days we live in it’s sadly against one’s
interest. But we’re made like that and we must understand ourselves.
It’s of the very essence of our nature, and of yours exactly as much as
of mine or of that of the others. Don’t make a mistake about it--you’ll
prepare for yourself a bitter future. I know what becomes of us. We
suffer, we go through tortures, we die!”

The accent of passionate prophecy was in this lady’s voice, but her
brother made her no immediate answer, only indulging restlessly in
several turns about the room. At last he took up his hat. “I shall come
to an understanding with her to-morrow, and the next day, about this
hour, I shall bring her to see you. Meanwhile please say nothing to any
one.”

Mme. de Brecourt’s eyes lingered on him; he had grasped the knob of the
door. “What do you mean by her father’s being certainly rich? That’s
such a vague term. What do you suppose his fortune to be?”

“Ah that’s a question SHE would never ask!” her brother cried as he left
her.




VI


The next morning he found himself seated on one of the red-satin sofas
beside Mr. Dosson in this gentleman’s private room at the Hotel de
l’Univers et de Cheltenham. Delia and Francie had established their
father in the old quarters; they expected to finish the winter in Paris,
but had not taken independent apartments, for they had an idea that when
you lived that way it was grand but lonely--you didn’t meet people
on the staircase. The temperature was now such as to deprive the good
gentleman of his usual resource of sitting in the court, and he had not
yet discovered an effective substitute for this recreation. Without Mr.
Flack, at the cafes, he felt too much a non-consumer. But he was
patient and ruminant; young Probert grew to like him and tried to invent
amusements for him; took him to see the great markets, the sewers and
the Bank of France, and put him, with the lushest disinterestedness,
in the way of acquiring a beautiful pair of horses, which Mr. Dosson,
little as he resembles a sporting character, found it a great resource,
on fine afternoons, to drive with a highly scientific hand and from a
smart Americaine, in the Bois de Boulogne. There was a reading-room
at the bankers’ where he spent hours engaged in a manner best known to
himself, and he shared the great interest, the constant topic of
his daughters--the portrait that was going forward in the Avenue de
Villiers.

This was the subject round which the thoughts of these young ladies
clustered and their activity revolved; it gave free play to their
faculty for endless repetition, for monotonous insistence, for vague
and aimless discussion. On leaving Mme. de Brecourt Francie’s lover had
written to Delia that he desired half an hour’s private conversation
with her father on the morrow at half-past eleven; his impatience
forbade him to wait for a more canonical hour. He asked her to be so
good as to arrange that Mr. Dosson should be there to receive him and to
keep Francie out of the way. Delia acquitted herself to the letter.

“Well, sir, what have you got to show?” asked Francie’s father, leaning
far back on the sofa and moving nothing but his head, and that very
little, toward his interlocutor. Gaston was placed sidewise, a hand on
each knee, almost facing him, on the edge of the seat.

“To show, sir--what do you mean?”

“What do you do for a living? How do you subsist?”

“Oh comfortably enough. Of course it would be remiss in you not to
satisfy yourself on that point. My income’s derived from three sources.
First some property left me by my dear mother. Second a legacy from my
poor brother--he had inherited a small fortune from an old relation of
ours who took a great fancy to him (he went to America to see her) which
he divided among the four of us in the will he made at the time of the
War.”’

“The war--what war?” asked Mr. Dosson.

“Why the Franco-German--”

“Oh THAT old war!” And Mr. Dosson almost laughed. “Well?” he mildly
continued.

“Then my father’s so good as to make me a decent allowance; and some day
I shall have more--from him.”

Mr. Dosson appeared to think these things over. “Why, you seem to have
fixed it so you live mostly on other folks.”

“I shall never attempt to live on you, sir!” This was spoken with some
vivacity by our young man; he felt the next moment that he had said
something that might provoke a retort. But his companion showed no
sharpness.

“Well, I guess there won’t be any trouble about that. And what does my
daughter say?”

“I haven’t spoken to her yet.”

“Haven’t spoken to the person most interested?”

“I thought it more orthodox to break ground with you first.”

“Well, when I was after Mrs. Dosson I guess I spoke to her quick
enough,” Francie’s father just a little dryly stated. There was an
element of reproach in this and Gaston was mystified, for the question
about his means a moment before had been in the nature of a challenge.

“How will you feel if she won’t have you after you’ve exposed yourself
this way to me?” Mr. Dosson went on.

“Well, I’ve a sort of confidence. It may be vain, but God grant not! I
think she likes me personally, but what I’m afraid of is that she
may consider she knows too little about me. She has never seen my
people--she doesn’t know what may be before her.”

“Do you mean your family--the folks at home?” said Mr. Dosson. “Don’t
you believe that. Delia has moused around--SHE has found out. Delia’s
thorough!”

“Well, we’re very simple kindly respectable people, as you’ll see in a
day or two for yourself. My father and sisters will do themselves the
honour to wait upon you,” the young man announced with a temerity the
sense of which made his voice tremble.

“We shall be very happy to see them, sir,” his host cheerfully returned.
“Well now, let’s see,” the good gentleman socially mused. “Don’t you
expect to embrace any regular occupation?”

Gaston smiled at him as from depths. “Have YOU anything of that sort,
sir?”

“Well, you have me there!” Mr. Dosson resignedly sighed. “It doesn’t
seem as if I required anything, I’m looked after so well. The fact is
the girls support me.”

“I shall not expect Miss Francie to support me,” said Gaston Probert.

“You’re prepared to enable her to live in the style to which she’s
accustomed?” And his friend turned on him an eye as of quite patient
speculation.

“Well, I don’t think she’ll miss anything. That is if she does she’ll
find other things instead.”

“I presume she’ll miss Delia, and even me a little,” it occurred to Mr.
Dosson to mention.

“Oh it’s easy to prevent that,” the young man threw off.

“Well, of course we shall be on hand.” After which Mr. Dosson continued
to follow the subject as at the same respectful distance. “You’ll
continue to reside in Paris?”

“I’ll live anywhere in the world she likes. Of course my people are
here--that’s a great tie. I’m not without hope that it may--with
time--become a reason for your daughter,” Gaston handsomely wound up.

“Oh any reason’ll do where Paris is concerned. Take some lunch?” Mr.
Dosson added, looking at his watch.

They rose to their feet, but before they had gone many steps--the meals
of this amiable family were now served in an adjoining room--the young
man stopped his companion. “I can’t tell you how kind I think it--the
way you treat me, and how I’m touched by your confidence. You take me
just as I am, with no recommendation beyond my own word.”

“Well, Mr. Probert,” said his host, “if we didn’t like you we wouldn’t
smile on you. Recommendations in that case wouldn’t be any good. And
since we do like you there ain’t any call for them either. I trust my
daughters; if I didn’t I’d have stayed at home. And if I trust them, and
they trust you, it’s the same as if _I_ trusted you, ain’t it?”

“I guess it is!” Gaston delightedly smiled.

His companion laid a hand on the door, but paused a moment. “Now are you
very sure?”

“I thought I was, but you make me nervous.”

“Because there was a gentleman here last year--I’d have put my money on
HIM.”

Gaston wondered. “A gentleman--last year?”

“Mr. Flack. You met him surely. A very fine man. I thought he rather hit
it off with her.”

“Seigneur Dieu!” Gaston Probert murmured under his breath.

Mr. Dosson had opened the door; he made his companion pass into the
small dining-room where the table was spread for the noonday breakfast.
“Where are the chickens?” he disappointedly asked. His visitor at
first supposed him to have missed a customary dish from the board, but
recognised the next moment his usual designation of his daughters. These
young ladies presently came in, but Francie looked away from the suitor
for her hand. The suggestion just dropped by her father had given him a
shock--the idea of the newspaper-man’s personal success with so rare
a creature was inconceivable--but her charming way of avoiding his eye
convinced him he had nothing to really fear from Mr. Flack.

That night--it had been an exciting day--Delia remarked to her sister
that of course she could draw back; upon which as Francie repeated the
expression with her so markedly looser grasp, “You can send him a note
saying you won’t,” Delia explained.

“Won’t marry him?”

“Gracious, no! Won’t go to see his sister. You can tell him it’s her
place to come to see you first.”

“Oh I don’t care,” said Francie wearily.

Delia judged this with all her weight. “Is that the way you answered him
when he asked you?”

“I’m sure I don’t know. He could tell you best.”

“If you were to speak to ME that way I guess I’d have said ‘Oh well, if
you don’t want it any more than that--!’”

“Well, I wish it WAS you,” said Francie.

“That Mr. Probert was me?”

“No--that you were the one he’s after.”

“Francie Dosson, are you thinking of Mr. Flack?” her sister suddenly
broke out.

“No, not much.”

“Well then what’s the matter?”

“You’ve ideas and opinions; you know whose place it is and what’s due
and what ain’t. You could meet them all,” Francie opined.

But Delia was indifferent to this tribute. “Why how can you say, when
that’s just what I’m trying to find out!”

“It doesn’t matter anyway; it will never come off,” Francie went on.

“What do you mean by that?”

“He’ll give me up in a few weeks. I’ll be sure to do something.”

“Do something--?”

“Well, that will break the charm,” Francie sighed with the sweetest
feeblest fatalism.

“If you say that again I shall think you do it on purpose!” Delia
declared. “ARE you thinking of George Flack?” she repeated in a moment.

“Oh do leave him alone!” Francie answered in one of her rare
irritations.

“Then why are you so queer?”

“Oh I’m tired!”--and the girl turned impatiently away. And this was the
simple truth; she was tired of the consideration her sister saw fit to
devote to the question of Gaston’s not having, since their return to
Paris, brought the old folks, as they used to say at home, to see them.
She was overdone with Delia’s theories on this subject, which varied,
from the view that he was keeping his intercourse with his American
friends unguessed by them because they were uncompromising in their
grandeur, to the presumption that that grandeur would descend some day
upon the Hotel de l’Univers et de Cheltenham and carry Francie away in a
blaze of glory. Sometimes Delia played in her earnest way with the idea
that they ought to make certain of Gaston’s omissions the ground of a
challenge; at other times she gave her reasons for judging that they
ought to take no notice of them. Francie, in this connexion, had neither
doctrine nor instinct of her own; and now she was all at once happy and
uneasy, all at once in love and in doubt and in fear and in a state
of native indifference. Her lover had dwelt to her but little on his
domestic circle, and she had noticed this circumstance the more because
of a remark dropped by Charles Waterlow to the effect that he and
his father were great friends: the word seemed to her odd in that
application. She knew he saw that gentleman and the types of high
fashion, as she supposed, Mr. Probert’s daughters, very often, and she
therefore took for granted that they knew he saw her. But the most he
had done was to say they would come and see her like a shot if once
they should believe they could trust her. She had wanted to know what he
meant by their trusting her, and he had explained that it would seem
to them too good to be true--that she should be kind to HIM: something
exactly of that sort was what they dreamed of for him. But they had
dreamed before and been disappointed and were now on their guard. From
the moment they should feel they were on solid ground they would join
hands and dance round her. Francie’s answer to this ingenuity was that
she didn’t know what he was talking about, and he indulged in no attempt
on that occasion to render his meaning more clear; the consequence of
which was that he felt he bore as yet with an insufficient mass, he cut,
to be plain, a poor figure. His uneasiness had not passed away, for
many things in truth were dark to him. He couldn’t see his father
fraternising with Mr. Dosson, he couldn’t see Margaret and Jane
recognising an alliance in which Delia was one of the allies. He had
answered for them because that was the only thing to do, and this only
just failed to be criminally reckless. What saved it was the hope he
founded upon Mme. de Brecourt and the sense of how well he could answer
to the others for Francie. He considered that Susan had in her first
judgement of his young lady committed herself; she had really taken her
in, and her subsequent protest when she found what was in his heart
had been a denial which he would make her in turn deny. The girl’s slow
sweetness once acting, she would come round. A simple interview with
Francie would suffice for this result--by the end of half an hour she
should be an enthusiastic convert. By the end of an hour she would
believe she herself had invented the match--had discovered the pearl.
He would pack her off to the others as the author of the plan; she would
take it all upon herself, would represent him even as hanging a little
back. SHE would do nothing of that sort, but would boast of her superior
flair, and would so enjoy the comedy as to forget she had resisted him
even a moment. The young man had a high sense of honour but was ready in
this forecast for fifty fibs.




VII

It may as well be said at once that his prevision was soon made good
and that in the course of a fortnight old Mr. Probert and his daughters
alighted successively at the Hotel de l’Univers et de Cheltenham.
Francie’s visit with her intended to Mme. de Brecourt bore exactly the
fruit her admirer had foretold and was followed the very next day by a
call from this lady. She took the girl out with her in her carriage and
kept her the whole afternoon, driving her half over Paris, chattering
with her, kissing her, delighting in her, telling her they were already
sisters, paying her compliments that made Francie envy her art of saying
things as she had never heard things said--for the excellent reason,
among many, that she had never known such things COULD be. After she had
dropped her charge this critic rushed off to her father’s, reflecting
with pleasure that at that hour she should probably find her sister
Marguerite there. Mme. de Cliche was with their parent in fact--she had
three days in the week for coming to the Cours la Reine; she sat near
him in the firelight, telling him presumably her troubles, for,
Maxime de Cliche having proved not quite the pearl they had originally
supposed, Mme. de Brecourt knew what Marguerite did whenever she took
that little ottoman and drew it close to the paternal chair: she gave
way to her favourite vice, that of dolefulness, which lengthened her
long face more: it was unbecoming if she only knew it. The family was
intensely united, as we see; but that didn’t prevent Mme. de Brecourt’s
having a certain sympathy for Maxime: he too was one of themselves,
and she asked herself what SHE would have done had she been a
well-constituted man with a wife whose cheeks were like decks in a high
sea. It was the twilight hour in the winter days, before the lamps, that
especially brought her out; then she began her long stories about her
complicated cares, to which her father listened with angelic patience.
Mme. de Brecourt liked his particular room in the old house in the Cours
la Reine; it reminded her of her mother’s life and her young days and
her dead brother and the feelings connected with her first going into
the world. Alphonse and she had had an apartment, by her father’s
kindness, under the roof that covered in associations as the door of a
linen-closet preserves herbaceous scents, so that she continued to pop
in and out, full of her fresh impressions of society, just as she had
done when she was a girl. She broke into her sister’s confidences now;
she announced her trouvaille and did battle for it bravely.

Five days later--there had been lively work in the meantime; Gaston
turned so pale at moments that she feared it would all result in a
mortal illness for him, and Marguerite shed gallons of tears--Mr.
Probert went to see the Dossons with his son. Mme. de Brecourt paid them
another visit, a real official affair as she deemed it, accompanied by
her husband; and the Baron de Douves and his wife, written to by Gaston,
by his father and by Margaret and Susan, came up from the country full
of anxious participation. M. de Douves was the person who took the
family, all round, most seriously and who most deprecated any sign of
crude or precipitate action. He was a very small black gentleman with
thick eyebrows and high heels--in the country and the mud he wore sabots
with straw in them--who was suspected by his friends of believing that
he looked like Louis XIV. It is perhaps a proof that something of the
quality of this monarch was really recognised in him that no one had
ever ventured to clear up this point by a question. “La famille c’est
moi” appeared to be his tacit formula, and he carried his umbrella--he
had very bad ones, Gaston thought--with something of a sceptral
air. Mme. de Brecourt went so far as to believe that his wife, in
confirmation of this, took herself for a species of Mme. de Maintenon:
she had lapsed into a provincial existence as she might have harked back
to the seventeenth century; the world she lived in seemed about as far
away. She was the largest, heaviest member of the family, and in the
Vendee was thought majestic despite the old clothes she fondly affected
and which added to her look of having come down from a remote past or
reverted to it. She was at bottom an excellent woman, but she wrote
roy and foy like her husband, and the action of her mind was wholly
restricted to questions of relationship and alliance. She had
extraordinary patience of research and tenacity of grasp for a clue, and
viewed people solely in the light projected upon them by others; that
is not as good or wicked, ugly or handsome, wise or foolish, but as
grandsons, nephews, uncles and aunts, brothers and sisters-in-law,
cousins and second cousins. You might have supposed, to listen to
her, that human beings were susceptible of no attribute but that of a
dwindling or thickening consanguinity. There was a certain expectation
that she would leave rather formidable memoirs. In Mme. de Brecourt’s
eyes this pair were very shabby, they didn’t payer de mine--they fairly
smelt of their province; “but for the reality of the thing,” she often
said to herself, “they’re worth all of us. We’re diluted and they’re
pure, and any one with an eye would see it.” “The thing” was the
legitimist principle, the ancient faith and even a little the right, the
unconscious, grand air.

The Marquis de Cliche did his duty with his wife, who mopped the decks,
as Susan said, for the occasion, and was entertained in the red-satin
drawing-room by Mr. Dosson, Delia and Francie. Mr. Dosson had wanted and
proposed to be somewhere else when he heard of the approach of Gaston’s
relations, and the fond youth had to instruct him that this wouldn’t do.
The apartment in question had had a range of vision, but had probably
never witnessed stranger doings than these laudable social efforts.
Gaston was taught to feel that his family had made a great sacrifice for
him, but in a very few days he said to himself that now they knew the
worst he was safe. They made the sacrifice, they definitely agreed to
it, but they thought proper he should measure the full extent of it.
“Gaston must never, never, never be allowed to forget what we’ve done
for him:” Mme. de Brecourt told him that Marguerite de Cliche had
expressed herself in that sense at one of the family conclaves from
which he was absent. These high commissions sat for several days with
great frequency, and the young man could feel that if there was help for
him in discussion his case was promising. He flattered himself that he
showed infinite patience and tact, and his expenditure of the latter
quality in particular was in itself his only reward, for it was
impossible he should tell Francie what arts he had to practise for her.
He liked to think however that he practised them successfully; for he
held that it was by such arts the civilised man is distinguished from
the savage. What they cost him was made up simply in this--that his
private irritation produced a degree of adoptive heat in regard to Mr.
Dosson and Delia, whom he could neither justify nor coherently account
for nor make people like, but whom he had ended after so many days of
familiar intercourse by liking extremely himself. The way to get on with
them--it was an immense simplification--was just to love them: one could
do that even if one couldn’t converse with them. He succeeded in making
Mme. de Brecourt seize this nuance; she embraced the idea with her quick
inflammability. “Yes,” she said, “we must insist on their positive, not
on their negative merits: their infinite generosity, their untutored,
their intensely native and instinctive delicacy. Ah their charming
primitive instincts--we must work those!” And the brother and sister
excited each other magnanimously to this undertaking. Sometimes, it must
be added, they exchanged a look that seemed to sound with a slight alarm
the depth of their responsibility.

On the day Mr. Probert called at the Hotel de l’Univers et de Cheltenham
with his son the pair walked away together, back to the Cours la Reine,
without immediate comments. The only words uttered were three or four of
Mr. Probert’s, with Gaston’s rejoinder, as they crossed the Place de la
Concorde.

“We should have to have them to dinner.” The young man noted his
father’s conditional, as if his assent to the strange alliance were not
yet complete; but he guessed all the same that the sight of them had
not made a difference for the worse: they had let the old gentleman down
more easily than was to have been feared. The call had had above all the
immense luck that it hadn’t been noisy--a confusion of underbred sounds;
which was very happy, for Mr. Probert was particular in this: he could
bear French noise but couldn’t for the life of him bear American. As
for English he maintained that there was no such thing: England was a
country with the straw down in all the thoroughfares of talk. Mr. Dosson
had scarcely spoken and yet had remained perfectly placid, which was
exactly what Gaston would have chosen. No hauteur could have matched
it--he had gone so little out of his way. Francie’s lover knew
moreover--though he was a little disappointed that no charmed
exclamation should have been dropped as they quitted the hotel--that the
girl’s rare spell had worked: it was impossible the old man shouldn’t
have liked her.

“Ah do ask them, and let it be very soon,” he replied. “They’ll like it
so much.”

“And whom can they meet--who can meet THEM?”

“Only the family--all of us: au complet. Other people we can have
later.”

“All of us au complet--that makes eight. And the three of THEM,” said
Mr. Probert. Then he added: “Poor creatures!” The fine ironic humane
sound of it gave Gaston much pleasure; he passed his hand into his
father’s arm. It promised well; it made the intelligent, the tender
allowance for the dear little Dossons confronted with a row of fierce
French critics, judged by standards they had never even heard of. The
meeting of the two parents had not made the problem of their commerce
any more clear; but our youth was reminded afresh by his elder’s hinted
pity, his breathed charity, of the latent liberality that was really
what he had built on. The dear old governor, goodness knew, had
prejudices and superstitions, but if they were numerous, and some
of them very curious, they were not rigid. He had also such nice
inconsistent feelings, such irrepressible indulgences, such humorous
deviations, and they would ease everything off. He was in short an old
darling, and with an old darling in the long run one was always safe.
When they reached the house in the Cours la Reine Mr. Probert said: “I
think you told me you’re dining out.”

“Yes, with our friends.”

“‘Our friends’? Comme vous y allez! Come in and see me then on your
return; but not later than half-past ten.”

From this the young man saw he had swallowed the dose; if he had found
it refuse to go down he would have cried for relief without delay. This
reflexion was highly agreeable, for Gaston perfectly knew how little he
himself would have enjoyed a struggle. He would have carried it through,
but he couldn’t bear to think of that, and the sense of the further
arguments he was spared made him feel at peace with all the world. The
dinner at the hotel became the gayest of banquets in honour of this
state of things, especially as Francie and Delia raved, as they said,
about his poppa.

“Well, I expected something nice, but he goes far beyond!” Delia
declared. “That’s my idea of a real gentleman.”

“Ah for that--!” said Gaston.

“He’s too sweet for anything. I’m not a bit afraid of him,” Francie
contributed.

“Why in the world should you be?”

“Well, I am of you,” the girl professed.

“Much you show it!” her lover returned.

“Yes, I am,” she insisted, “at the bottom of all.”

“Well, that’s what a lady should be--afraid of her lord and master.”

“Well, I don’t know; I’m more afraid than that. You’ll see.”

“I wish you were afraid of talking nonsense,” said happy Gaston.

Mr. Dosson made no observation whatever about their grave bland visitor;
he listened in genial unprejudiced silence. It was a sign of his
prospective son-in-law’s perfect comprehension of him that Gaston knew
this silence not to be in any degree restrictive: it didn’t at all mean
he hadn’t been pleased. Mr. Dosson had nothing to say because nothing
had been given him; he hadn’t, like his so differently-appointed young
friend, a sensitive plate for a brain, and the important events of his
life had never been personal impressions. His mind had had absolutely no
history with which anything occurring in the present connexion could be
continuous, and Mr. Probert’s appearance had neither founded a state nor
produced a revolution. If the young man had asked him how he liked his
father he would have said at the most: “Oh I guess he’s all right!” But
what was more touchingly candid even than this in Gaston’s view was
the attitude of the good gentleman and his daughters toward the others,
Mesdames de Douves, de Brecourt and de Cliche and their husbands,
who had now all filed before them. They believed the ladies and the
gentlemen alike to have covered them with frank endearments, to have
been artlessly and gushingly glad to make their acquaintance. They had
not in the least seen what was manner, the minimum of decent profession,
and what the subtle resignation of old races who have known a long
historical discipline and have conventional forms and tortuous channels
and grimacing masks for their impulses--forms resembling singularly
little the feelings themselves. Francie took people at their word when
they told her that the whole maniere d’etre of her family inspired them
with an irresistible sympathy: that was a speech of which Mme. de Cliche
had been capable, speaking as if for all the Proberts and for the old
noblesse of France. It wouldn’t have occurred to the girl that such
things need have been said as for mere frilling and finish. Her lover,
whose life affected her as a picture, of high price in itself but set in
a frame too big and too heavy for it, and who therefore might have taken
for granted any amount of gilding, yet made his reflexions on it now;
he noticed how a manner might be a very misleading symbol, might cover
pitfalls and bottomless gulfs, when it had reached that perfection and
corresponded so little to fact. What he had wanted was that his people
should be as easy as they could see their way to being, but with such a
high standard of compliment where after all was sincerity? And without
sincerity how could people get on together when it came to their
settling down to common life? Then the Dossons might have surprises, and
the surprises would be painful in proportion as their present innocence
was great. As to the high standard itself there was no manner of doubt:
there ought to be preserved examples of that perfection.




VIII

When on coming home again this evening, meanwhile, he complied with
his father’s request by returning to the room in which the old man
habitually sat, Mr. Probert laid down his book and kept on his glasses.
“Of course you’ll continue to live with me. You’ll understand that I
don’t consent to your going away. You’ll have the rooms occupied at
first by Susan and Alphonse.”

Gaston noted with pleasure the transition from the conditional to the
future tense, and also the circumstance that his father had been lost
in a book according to his now confirmed custom of evening ease. This
proved him not too much off the hinge. He read a great deal, and
very serious books; works about the origin of things--of man, of
institutions, of speech, of religion. This habit he had taken up more
particularly since the circle of his social life had contracted. He sat
there alone, turning his pages softly, contentedly, with the lamplight
shining on his refined old head and embroidered dressing-gown. He had
used of old to be out every night in the week--Gaston was perfectly
aware that to many dull people he must even have appeared a little
frivolous. He was essentially a social creature and indeed--except
perhaps poor Jane in her damp old castle in Brittany--they were all
social creatures. That was doubtless part of the reason why the family
had acclimatised itself in France. They had affinities with a society
of conversation; they liked general talk and old high salons, slightly
tarnished and dim, containing precious relics, where winged words flew
about through a circle round the fire and some clever person, before the
chimney-piece, held or challenged the others. That figure, Gaston knew,
especially in the days before he could see for himself, had very often
been his father, the lightest and most amiable specimen of the type that
enjoyed easy possession of the hearth-rug. People left it to him; he was
so transparent, like a glass screen, and he never triumphed in debate.
His word on most subjects was not felt to be the last (it was usually
not more conclusive than a shrugging inarticulate resignation, an “Ah
you know, what will you have?”); but he had been none the less a part
of the very prestige of some dozen good houses, most of them over
the river, in the conservative faubourg, and several to-day profaned
shrines, cold and desolate hearths. These had made up Mr. Probert’s
pleasant world--a world not too small for him and yet not too large,
though some of them supposed themselves great institutions. Gaston knew
the succession of events that had helped to make a difference, the most
salient of which were the death of his brother, the death of his mother,
and above all perhaps the demise of Mme. de Marignac, to whom the
old boy used still to go three or four evenings out of the seven and
sometimes even in the morning besides. Gaston fully measured the place
she had held in his father’s life and affection, and the terms on
which they had grown up together--her people had been friends of his
grandfather when that fine old Southern worthy came, a widower with a
young son and several negroes, to take his pleasure in Paris in the time
of Louis Philippe--and the devoted part she had played in marrying his
sisters. He was quite aware that her friendship and all its exertions
were often mentioned as explaining their position, so remarkable in a
society in which they had begun after all as outsiders. But he would
have guessed, even if he had not been told, what his father said
to that. To offer the Proberts a position was to carry water to the
fountain; they hadn’t left their own behind them in Carolina; it had
been large enough to stretch across the sea. As to what it was in
Carolina there was no need of being explicit. This adoptive Parisian was
by nature presupposing, but he was admirably urbane--that was why they
let him talk so before the fire; he was the oracle persuasive, the
conciliatory voice--and after the death of his wife and of Mme. de
Marignac, who had been her friend too, the young man’s mother’s, he was
gentler, if more detached, than before. Gaston had already felt him
to care in consequence less for everything--except indeed for the true
faith, to which he drew still closer--and this increase of indifference
doubtless helped to explain his present charming accommodation.

“We shall be thankful for any rooms you may give us,” his son said.
“We shall fill out the house a little, and won’t that be rather an
improvement, shrunken as you and I have become?”

“You’ll fill it out a good deal, I suppose, with Mr. Dosson and the
other girl.”

“Ah Francie won’t give up her father and sister, certainly; and what
should you think of her if she did? But they’re not intrusive; they’re
essentially modest people; they won’t put themselves upon us. They have
great natural discretion,” Gaston declared.

“Do you answer for that? Susan does; she’s always assuring one of it,”
 Mr. Probert said. “The father has so much that he wouldn’t even speak to
me.”

“He didn’t, poor dear man, know what to say.”

“How then shall I know what to say to HIM?”

“Ah you always know!” Gaston smiled.

“How will that help us if he doesn’t know what to answer?”

“You’ll draw him out. He’s full of a funny little shade of bonhomie.”

“Well, I won’t quarrel with your bonhomme,” said Mr. Probert--“if he’s
silent there are much worse faults; nor yet with the fat young lady,
though she’s evidently vulgar--even if you call it perhaps too a funny
little shade. It’s not for ourselves I’m afraid; it’s for them. They’ll
be very unhappy.”

“Never, never!” said Gaston. “They’re too simple. They’ll remain so.
They’re not morbid nor suspicious. And don’t you like Francie? You
haven’t told me so,” he added in a moment.

“She talks about ‘Parus,’ my dear boy.”

“Ah to Susan too that seemed the great barrier. But she has got over it.
I mean Susan has got over the barrier. We shall make her speak French;
she has a real disposition for it; her French is already almost as good
as her English.”

“That oughtn’t to be difficult. What will you have? Of course she’s very
pretty and I’m sure she’s good. But I won’t tell you she is a marvel,
because you must remember--you young fellows think your own point of
view and your own experience everything--that I’ve seen beauties without
number. I’ve known the most charming women of our time--women of an
order to which Miss Francie, con rispetto parlando, will never begin to
belong. I’m difficult about women--how can I help it? Therefore when
you pick up a little American girl at an inn and bring her to us as
a miracle, feel how standards alter. J’ai vu mieux que ca, mon cher.
However, I accept everything to-day, as you know; when once one has lost
one’s enthusiasm everything’s the same and one might as well perish by
the sword as by famine.”

“I hoped she’d fascinate you on the spot,” Gaston rather ruefully
remarked.

“‘Fascinate’--the language you fellows use! How many times in one’s life
is one likely to be fascinated?”

“Well, she’ll charm you yet.”

“She’ll never know at least that she doesn’t: I’ll engage for that,”
 said Mr. Probert handsomely.

“Ah be sincere with her, father--she’s worth it!” his son broke out.

When the elder man took that tone, the tone of vast experience and a
fastidiousness justified by ineffable recollections, our friend was more
provoked than he could say, though he was also considerably amused, for
he had a good while since, made up his mind about the element of rather
stupid convention in it. It was fatuous to miss so little the fine
perceptions one didn’t have: so far from its showing experience it
showed a sad simplicity not to FEEL Francie Dosson. He thanked God she
was just the sort of imponderable infinite quantity, such as there were
no stupid terms for, that he did feel. He didn’t know what old frumps
his father might have frequented--the style of 1830, with long curls in
front, a vapid simper, a Scotch plaid dress and a corsage, in a point
suggestive of twenty whalebones, coming down to the knees--but he could
remember Mme. de Marignac’s Tuesdays and Thursdays and Fridays, with
Sundays and other days thrown in, and the taste that prevailed in that
milieu: the books they admired, the verses they read and recited, the
pictures, great heaven! they thought good, and the three busts of the
lady of the house in different corners (as a Diana, a Druidess and a
Croyante: her shoulders were supposed to make up for her head), effigies
the public ridicule attaching to which to-day would--even the least bad,
Canova’s--make their authors burrow in holes for shame.

“And what else is she worth?” Mr. Probert asked after a momentary
hesitation.

“How do you mean, what else?”

“Her immense prospects, that’s what Susan has been putting forward.
Susan’s insistence on them was mainly what brought over Jane. Do you
mind my speaking of them?”

Gaston was obliged to recognise privately the importance of Jane’s
having been brought over, but he hated to hear it spoken of as if he
were under an obligation to it. “To whom, sir?” he asked.

“Oh only to you.”

“You can’t do less than Mr. Dosson. As I told you, he waived the
question of money and he was splendid. We can’t be more mercenary than
he.”

“He waived the question of his own, you mean?” said Mr. Probert.

“Yes, and of yours. But it will be all right.” The young man flattered
himself that this was as near as he was willing to go to any view of
pecuniary convenience.

“Well, it’s your affair--or your sisters’,” his father returned.

“It’s their idea that we see where we are and that we make the best of
it.”

“It’s very good of them to make the best of it and I should think they’d
be tired of their own chatter,” Gaston impatiently sighed.

Mr. Probert looked at him a moment in vague surprise, but only said: “I
think they are. However, the period of discussion’s closed. We’ve taken
the jump.” He then added as to put the matter a little less dryly:
“Alphonse and Maxime are quite of your opinion.”

“Of my opinion?”

“That she’s charming.”

“Confound them then, I’m not of theirs!” The form of this rejoinder
was childishly perverse, and it made Mr. Probert stare again; but it
belonged to one of the reasons for which his children regarded him as
an old darling that Gaston could suppose him after an instant to embrace
it. The old man said nothing, but took up his book, and his son, who had
been standing before the fire, went out of the room. His abstention from
protest at Gaston’s petulance was the more generous as he was capable,
for his part, of feeling it to make for a greater amenity in the whole
connexion that ces messieurs should like the little girl at the hotel.
Gaston didn’t care a straw what it made for, and would have seen himself
in bondage indeed had he given a second thought to the question. This
was especially the case as his father’s mention of the approval of two
of his brothers-in-law appeared to point to a possible disapproval
on the part of the third. Francie’s lover cared as little whether she
displeased M. de Brecourt as he cared whether she pleased Maxime and
Raoul. Mr. Probert continued to read, and in a few moments Gaston was
with him again. He had expressed surprise, just before, at the wealth of
discussion his sisters had been ready to expend in his interest, but
he managed to convey now that there was still a point of a certain
importance to be made. “It seems rather odd to me that you should all
appear to accept the step I’M about to take as a necessity disagreeable
at the best, when I myself hold that I’ve been so exceedingly
fortunate.”

Mr. Probert lowered his book accommodatingly and rested his eyes on
the fire. “You won’t be content till we’re enthusiastic. She seems an
amiable girl certainly, and in that you’re fortunate.”

“I don’t think you can tell me what would be better--what you’d have
preferred,” the young man said.

“What I should have preferred? In the first place you must remember that
I wasn’t madly impatient to see you married.”

“I can imagine that, and yet I can’t imagine that as things have turned
out you shouldn’t be struck with my felicity. To get something so
charming and to get it of our own species!” Gaston explained.

“Of our own species? Tudieu!” said his father, looking up.

“Surely it’s infinitely fresher and more amusing for me to marry
an American. There’s a sad want of freshness--there’s even a
provinciality--in the way we’ve Gallicised.”

“Against Americans I’ve nothing to say; some of them are the best thing
the world contains. That’s precisely why one can choose. They’re far
from doing all like that.”

“Like what, dear father?”

“Comme ces gens-la. You know that if they were French, being otherwise
what they are, one wouldn’t look at them.”

“Indeed one would; they would be such rare curiosities.”

“Well, perhaps they’ll do for queer fish,” said Mr. Probert with a
little conclusive sigh.

“Yes, let them pass at that. They’ll surprise you.”

“Not too much, I hope!” cried the old man, opening his volume again.

The complexity of things among the Proberts, it needn’t nevertheless
startle us to learn, was such as to make it impossible for Gaston
to proceed to the celebration of his nuptial, with all the needful
circumstances of material preparation and social support, before some
three months should have expired. He chafed however but moderately under
this condition, for he remembered it would give Francie time to endear
herself to his whole circle. It would also have advantages for the
Dossons; it would enable them to establish by simple but effective arts
some modus vivendi with that rigid body. It would in short help every
one to get used to everything. Mr. Dosson’s designs and Delia’s took
no articulate form; what was mainly clear to Gaston was that his future
wife’s relatives had as yet no sense of disconnexion. He knew that
Mr. Dosson would do whatever Delia liked and that Delia would like to
“start” her sister--this whether or no she expected to be present at the
rest of the race. Mr. Probert notified Mr. Dosson of what he proposed
to “do” for his son, and Mr. Dosson appeared more quietly amused than
anything else at the news. He announced in return no intentions in
regard to Francie, and his strange silence was the cause of another
convocation of the house of Probert. Here Mme. de Brecourt’s bold front
won another victory; she maintained, as she let her brother know, that
it was too late for any policy but a policy of confidence. “Lord help
us, is that what they call confidence?” the young man gasped, guessing
the way they all had looked at each other; and he wondered how they
would look next at poor Mr. Dosson himself. Fortunately he could always
fall back, for reassurance, on the perfection of their “forms”; though
indeed he thoroughly knew that these forms would never appear so
striking as on the day--should such a day fatally come--of their
meddling too much.

Mr. Probert’s property was altogether in the United States: he resembled
other discriminating persons for whom the only good taste in America was
the taste of invested and paying capital. The provisions he was engaging
to make for his son’s marriage rendered advisable some attention, on the
spot, to interests with the management of which he was acquainted only
by report. It had long been his conviction that his affairs beyond the
sea needed looking into; they had gone on and on for years too far from
the master’s eye. He had thought of making the journey in the cause of
that vigilance, but now he was too old and too tired and the effort had
become impossible. There was nothing therefore but for Gaston to go, and
go quickly, though the time so little fostered his absence from Paris.
The duty was none the less laid upon him and the question practically
faced; then everything yielded to the consideration that he had
best wait till after his marriage, when he might be so auspiciously
accompanied by his wife. Francie would be in many ways so propitious an
introducer. This abatement would have taken effect had not a call for an
equal energy on Mr. Dosson’s part suddenly appeared to reach and to
move that gentleman. He had business on the other side, he announced,
to attend to, though his starting for New York presented difficulties,
since he couldn’t in such a situation leave his daughters alone. Not
only would such a proceeding have given scandal to the Proberts, but
Gaston learned, with much surprise and not a little amusement, that
Delia, in consequence of changes now finely wrought in her personal
philosophy, wouldn’t have felt his doing so square with propriety. The
young man was able to put it to her that nothing would be simpler than,
in the interval, for Francie to go and stay with Susan or Margaret; she
herself in that case would be free to accompany her father. But Delia
declared at this that nothing would induce her to budge from Paris till
she had seen her sister through, and Gaston shrank from proposing that
she too should spend five weeks in the Place Beauvau or the Rue de
Lille. There was moreover a slight element of the mystifying for him
in the perverse unsociable way in which Francie took up a position of
marked disfavour as yet to any “visiting.” AFTER, if he liked, but
not till then. And she wouldn’t at the moment give the reasons of her
refusal; it was only very positive and even quite passionate.

All this left her troubled suitor no alternative but to say to Mr.
Dosson: “I’m not, my dear sir, such a fool as I look. If you’ll coach
me properly, and trust me, why shouldn’t I rush across and transact
your business as well as my father’s?” Strange as it appeared, Francie
offered herself as accepting this separation from her lover, which
would last six or seven weeks, rather than accept the hospitality of
any member of his family. Mr. Dosson, on his side, was grateful for the
solution; he remarked “Well, sir, you’ve got a big brain” at the end of
a morning they spent with papers and pencils; and on this Gaston made
his preparations to sail. Before he left Paris Francie, to do her
justice, confided to him that her objection to going in such an intimate
way even to Mme. de Brecourt’s had been founded on a fear that in close
quarters she might do something that would make them all despise her.
Gaston replied, in the first place, ardently, that this was the very
delirium of delicacy, and that he wanted to know in the second if she
expected never to be at close quarters with “tous les siens.” “Ah yes,
but then it will be safer,” she pleaded; “then we shall be married and
by so much, shan’t we? be beyond harm.” In rejoinder to which he had
simply kissed her; the passage taking place three days before her lover
took ship. What further befell in the brief interval was that, stopping
for a last word at the Hotel de l’Univers et the Cheltenham on his
way to catch the night express to London--he was to sail from
Liverpool--Gaston found Mr. George Flack sitting in the red-satin
saloon. The correspondent of the Reverberator had come back.




IX

Mr. Flack’s relations with his old friends didn’t indeed, after his
return, take on the familiarity and frequency of their intercourse
a year before: he was the first to refer to the marked change in the
situation. They had got into the high set and they didn’t care about the
past: he alluded to the past as if it had been rich in mutual vows, in
pledges now repudiated.

“What’s the matter all the same? Won’t you come round there with us some
day?” Mr. Dosson asked; not having perceived for himself any reason why
the young journalist shouldn’t be a welcome and easy presence in the
Cours la Reine.

Delia wanted to know what Mr. Flack was talking about: didn’t he know
a lot of people that they didn’t know and wasn’t it natural they should
have their own society? The young man’s treatment of the question was
humorous, and it was with Delia that the discussion mainly went forward.
When he maintained that the Dossons had shamelessly “shed” him Mr.
Dosson returned “Well, I guess you’ll grow again!” And Francie made
the point that it was no use for him to pose as a martyr, since he knew
perfectly well that with all the celebrated people he saw and the way
he flew round he had the most enchanting time. She was aware of being
a good deal less accessible than the previous spring, for Mesdames de
Brecourt and de Cliche--the former indeed more than the latter--occupied
many of her hours. In spite of her having held off, to Gaston, from
a premature intimacy with his sisters, she spent whole days in their
company--they had so much to tell her of how her new life would shape,
and it seemed mostly very pleasant--and she thought nothing could be
nicer than that in these intervals he should give himself to her father,
and even to Delia, as had been his wont.

But the flaw of a certain insincerity in Mr. Flack’s nature was
suggested by his present tendency to rare visits. He evidently didn’t
care for her father in himself, and though this mild parent always took
what was set before him and never made fusses she is sure he felt their
old companion to have fallen away. There were no more wanderings in
public places, no more tryings of new cafes. Mr. Dosson used to look
sometimes as he had looked of old when George Flack “located” them
somewhere--as if he expected to see their heated benefactor rush back
to them with his drab overcoat flying in the wind; but this appearance
usually and rather touchingly subsided. He at any rate missed Gaston
because Gaston had this winter so often ordered his dinner for him; and
his society was not, to make it up, sought by the count and the marquis,
whose mastery of English was small and their other distractions great.
Mr. Probert, it was true, had shown something of a conversible spirit;
he had come twice to the hotel since his son’s departure and had said,
smiling and reproachful, “You neglect us, you neglect us, my dear
sir!” The good man had not understood what was meant by this till Delia
explained after the visitor had withdrawn, and even then the remedy for
the neglect, administered two or three days later, had not borne any
copious fruit. Mr. Dosson called alone, instructed by his daughter, in
the Cours la Reine, but Mr. Probert was not at home. He only left a card
on which Delia had superscribed in advance, almost with the legibility
of print, the words “So sorry!” Her father had told her he would give in
the card if she wanted, but would have nothing to do with the writing.
There was a discussion as to whether Mr. Probert’s remark was
an allusion to a deficiency of politeness on the article of his
sons-in-law. Oughtn’t Mr. Dosson perhaps to call personally, and not
simply through the medium of the visits paid by his daughters to their
wives, on Messieurs de Brecourt and de Cliche? Once when this subject
came up in George Flack’s presence the old man said he would go round
if Mr. Flack would accompany him. “All right, we’ll go right along!”
 Mr. Flack had responded, and this inspiration had become a living fact
qualified only by the “mercy,” to Delia Dosson, that the other two
gentlemen were not at home. “Suppose they SHOULD get in?” she had said
lugubriously to her sister.

“Well, what if they do?” Francie had asked.

“Why the count and the marquis won’t be interested in Mr. Flack.”

“Well then perhaps he’ll be interested in them. He can write something
about them. They’ll like that.”

“Do you think they would?” Delia had solemnly weighed it.

“Why, yes, if he should say fine things.”

“They do like fine things,” Delia had conceded. “They get off so many
themselves. Only the way Mr. Flack does it’s a different style.”

“Well, people like to be praised in any style.”

“That’s so,” Delia had continued to brood.

One afternoon, coming in about three o’clock, Mr. Flack found Francie
alone. She had expressed a wish after luncheon for a couple of hours
of independence: intending to write to Gaston, and having accidentally
missed a post, she had determined her letter should be of double its
usual length. Her companions had respected her claim for solitude, Mr.
Dosson taking himself off to his daily session in the reading-room of
the American bank and Delia--the girls had now at their command a
landau as massive as the coach of an ambassador--driving away to the
dressmaker’s, a frequent errand, to superintend and urge forward the
progress of her sister’s wedding-clothes. Francie was not skilled in
composition; she wrote slowly and had in thus addressing her lover much
the same sense of sore tension she supposed she should have in standing
at the altar with him. Her father and Delia had a theory that when she
shut herself up that way she poured forth pages that would testify to
her costly culture. When George Flack was ushered in at all events she
was still bent over her blotting-book at one of the gilded tables, and
there was an inkstain on her pointed forefinger. It was no disloyalty
to Gaston, but only at the most an echo as of the sweetness of “recess
time” in old school mornings that made her glad to see her visitor.

She hadn’t quite known how to finish her letter, in the infinite of the
bright propriety of her having written it, but Mr. Flack seemed to set a
practical human limit.

“I wouldn’t have ventured,” he observed on entering, “to propose this,
but I guess I can do with it now it’s come.”

“What can you do with?” she asked, wiping her pen.

“Well this happy chance. Just you and me together.”

“I don’t know what it’s a chance for.”

“Well, for me to be a little less miserable for a quarter of an hour. It
makes me so to see you look so happy.”

“It makes you miserable?”--Francie took it gaily but guardedly.

“You ought to understand--when I say something so noble.” And settling
himself on the sofa Mr. Flack continued: “Well, how do you get on
without Mr. Probert?”

“Very well indeed, thank you.” The tone in which the girl spoke was
not an encouragement to free pleasantry, so that if he continued his
enquiries it was with as much circumspection as he had perhaps ever in
his life recognised himself as having to apply to a given occasion. He
was eminently capable of the sense that it wasn’t in his interest to
strike her as indiscreet and profane; he only wanted still to appear
a real reliable “gentleman friend.” At the same time he was not
indifferent to the profit for him of her noticing in him a sense as of
a good fellow once badly “sold,” which would always give him a certain
pull on what he called to himself her lovely character. “Well, you’re in
the real ‘grand’ old monde now, I suppose,” he resumed at last, not
with an air of undue derision--rather with a kind of contemporary but
detached wistfulness.

“Oh I’m not in anything; I’m just where I’ve always been.”

“I’m sorry; I hoped you’d tell me a good lot about it,” said Mr. Flack,
not with levity.

“You think too much of that. What do you want to know so much about it
for?”

Well, he took some trouble for his reason. “Dear Miss Francie, a poor
devil of a journalist who has to get his living by studying-up things
has to think TOO much, sometimes, in order to think, or at any rate to
do, enough. We find out what we can--AS we can, you see.”

She did seem to catch in it the note of pathos. “What do you want to
study-up?”

“Everything! I take in everything. It all depends on my opportunity. I
try and learn--I try and improve. Every one has something to tell--or to
sell; and I listen and watch--well, for what I can drink in or can
buy. I hoped YOU’D have something to tell--for I’m not talking now of
anything but THAT. I don’t believe but what you’ve seen a good deal of
new life. You won’t pretend they ain’t working you right in, charming as
you are.”

“Do you mean if they’ve been kind and sweet to me? They’ve been very
kind and sweet,” Francie mid. “They want to do even more than I’ll let
them.”

“Ah why won’t you let them?” George Flack asked almost coaxingly.

“Well, I do, when it comes to anything,” the girl went on. “You can’t
resist them really; they’ve got such lovely ways.”

“I should like to hear you talk right out about their ways,” her
companion observed after a silence.

“Oh I could talk out right enough if once I were to begin. But I don’t
see why it should interest you.”

“Don’t I care immensely for everything that concerns you? Didn’t I tell
you that once?”--he put it very straight.

“Well, you were foolish ever, and you’d be foolish to say it again,”
 Francie replied.

“Oh I don’t want to say anything, I’ve had my lesson. But I could
listen to you all day.” Francie gave an exclamation of impatience and
incredulity, and Mr. Flack pursued: “Don’t you remember what you told me
that time we had that talk at Saint-Germain, on the terrace? You said I
might remain your friend.”

“Well, that’s all right,” said the girl.

“Then ain’t we interested in the development of our friends--in their
impressions, their situations and adventures? Especially a person like
me, who has got to know life whether he wants to or no--who has got to
know the world.”

“Do you mean to say I could teach you about life?” Francie beautifully
gaped.

“About some kinds certainly. You know a lot of people it’s difficult to
get at unless one takes some extraordinary measures, as you’ve done.”

“What do you mean? What measures have I done?”

“Well, THEY have--to get right hold of you--and its the same thing.
Pouncing on you, to secure you first--I call that energetic, and don’t
you think I ought to know?” smiled Mr. Flack with much meaning. “I
thought _I_ was energetic, but they got in ahead of me. They’re a
society apart, and they must be very curious.”

“Yes, they’re very curious,” Francie admitted with a resigned sigh. Then
she said: “Do you want to put them in the paper?”

George Flack cast about--the air of the question was so candid,
suggested so complete an exemption From prejudice. “Oh I’m very careful
about what I put in the paper. I want everything, as I told you; Don’t
you remember the sketch I gave you of my ideals? But I want it in the
right way and of the right brand. If I can’t get it in the shape I like
it I don’t want it at all; first-rate first-hand information, straight
from the tap, is what I’m after. I don’t want to hear what some one
or other thinks that some one or other was told that some one or other
believed or said; and above all I don’t want to print it. There’s plenty
of that flowing in, and the best part of the job’s to keep it out.
People just yearn to come in; they make love to me for it all over the
place; there’s the biggest crowd at the door. But I say to them: ‘You’ve
got to do something first, then I’ll see; or at any rate you’ve got to
BE something!’”

“We sometimes see the Reverberator. You’ve some fine pieces,” Francie
humanely replied.

“Sometimes only? Don’t they send it to the old gentleman--the weekly
edition? I thought I had fixed that,” said George Flack.

“I don’t know; it’s usually lying round. But Delia reads it more than I;
she reads pieces aloud. I like to read books; I read as many as I can.”

“Well, it’s all literature,” said Mr. Flack; “it’s all the press, the
great institution of our time. Some of the finest books have come out
first in the papers. It’s the history of the age.”

“I see you’ve got the same aspirations,” Francie remarked kindly.

“The same aspirations?”

“Those you told me about that day at Saint-Germain.”

“Oh I keep forgetting that I ever broke out to you that way.
Everything’s so changed.”

“Are you the proprietor of the paper now?” the girl went on, determined
not to catch this sentimental echo.

“What do you care? It wouldn’t even be delicate in me to tell you; for
I DO remember the way you said you’d try and get your father to help me.
Don’t say you’ve forgotten it, because you almost made me cry. Anyway,
that isn’t the sort of help I want now and it wasn’t the sort of help I
meant to ask you for then. I want sympathy and interest; I want some one
to say to me once in a while ‘Keep up your old heart, Mr. Flack; you’ll
come out all right.’ You see I’m a working-man and I don’t pretend to
be anything else,” Francie’s companion went on. “I don’t live on the
accumulations of my ancestors. What I have I earn--what I am I’ve fought
for: I’m a real old travailleur, as they say here. I rejoice in it, but
there’s one dark spot in it all the same.”

“And what’s that?” Francie decided not quite at once to ask.

“That it makes you ashamed of me.”

“Oh how can you say?” And she got up as if a sense of oppression, of
vague discomfort, had come over her. Her visitor troubled such peace as
she had lately arrived at.

“You wouldn’t be ashamed to go round with me?”

“Round where?”

“Well, anywhere: just to have one more walk. The very last.” George
Flack had got up too and stood there looking at her with his bright
eyes, his hands in the pockets of his overcoat. As she hesitated he
continued: “Then I’m not such a friend after all.”

She rested her eyes a moment on the carpet; then raising them: “Where
would you like to go?”

“You could render me a service--a real service--without any
inconvenience probably to yourself. Isn’t your portrait finished?”

“Yes, but he won’t give it up.”

“Who won’t give it up?”

“Why Mr. Waterlow. He wants to keep it near him to look at it in case he
should take a fancy to change it. But I hope he won’t change it--it’s so
lovely as it is!” Francie made a mild joke of saying.

“I hear it’s magnificent and I want to see it,” said George Flack.

“Then why don’t you go?”

“I’ll go if you’ll take me; that’s the service you can render me.”

“Why I thought you went everywhere--into the palaces of kings!” Francie
cried.

“I go where I’m welcome, not where I ain’t. I don’t want to push into
that studio alone; he doesn’t want me round. Oh you needn’t protest,”
 the young man went on; “if a fellow’s made sensitive he has got to stay
so. I feel those things in the shade of a tone of voice. He doesn’t like
newspaper-men. Some people don’t, you know. I ought to tell you that
frankly.”

Francie considered again, but looking this time at her visitor. “Why if
it hadn’t been for you “--I’m afraid she said “hadn’t have been”--“I’d
never have sat to him.”

Mr. Flack smiled at her in silence for a little. “If it hadn’t been for
me I think you’d never have met your future husband.”

“Perhaps not,” said Francie; and suddenly she blushed red, rather to her
companion’s surprise.

“I only say that to remind you that after all I’ve a right to ask you to
show me this one little favour. Let me drive with you to-morrow, or next
day or any day, to the Avenue de Villiers, and I shall regard myself as
amply repaid. With you I shan’t be afraid to go in, for you’ve a right
to take any one you like to see your picture. That’s the rule here.”

“Oh the day you’re afraid, Mr. Flack--!” Francie laughed without fear.
She had been much struck by his reminder of what they all owed him; for
he truly had been their initiator, the instrument, under providence,
that had opened a great new interest to them, and as she was more
listless about almost anything than at the sight of a person wronged she
winced at his describing himself as disavowed or made light of after the
prize was gained. Her mind had not lingered on her personal indebtedness
to him, for it was not in the nature of her mind to linger; but at
present she was glad to spring quickly, at the first word, into the
attitude of acknowledgement. It had the effect of simplification after
too multiplied an appeal--it brought up her spirits.

“Of course I must be quite square with you,” the young man said in a
tone that struck her as “higher,” somehow, than any she had ever heard
him use. “If I want to see the picture it’s because I want to write
about it. The whole thing will go bang into the Reverberator. You must
understand that in advance. I wouldn’t write about it without seeing it.
We don’t DO that”--and Mr. Flack appeared to speak proudly again for his
organ.

“J’espere bien!” said Francie, who was getting on famously with her
French. “Of course if you praise him Mr. Waterlow will like it.”

“I don’t know that he cares for my praise and I don’t care much whether
HE likes it or not. For you to like it’s the principal thing--we must do
with that.”

“Oh I shall be awfully proud.”

“I shall speak of you personally--I shall say you’re the prettiest girl
that has ever come over.”

“You may say what you like,” Francie returned. “It will be immense fun
to be in the newspapers. Come for me at this hour day after to-morrow.”

“You’re too kind,” said George Flack, taking up his hat. He smoothed it
down a moment with his glove; then he said: “I wonder if you’ll mind our
going alone?”

“Alone?”

“I mean just you and me.”

“Oh don’t you be afraid! Father and Delia have seen it about thirty
times.”

“That’ll be first-rate. And it will help me to feel, more than anything
else could make me do, that we’re still old friends. I couldn’t bear the
end of THAT. I’ll come at 3.15,” Mr. Flack went on, but without even yet
taking his departure. He asked two or three questions about the hotel,
whether it were as good as last year and there were many people in
it and they could keep their rooms warm; then pursued suddenly, on a
different plane and scarcely waiting for the girl’s answer: “And now for
instance are they very bigoted? That’s one of the things I should like
to know.”

“Very bigoted?”

“Ain’t they tremendous Catholics--always talking about the Holy Father;
what they call here the throne and the altar? And don’t they want the
throne too? I mean Mr. Probert, the old gentleman,” Mr. Flack added.
“And those grand ladies and all the rest of them.”

“They’re very religious,” said Francie. “They’re the most religious
people I ever saw. They just adore the Holy Father. They know him
personally quite well. They’re always going down to Rome.”

“And do they mean to introduce you to him?”

“How do you mean, to introduce me?”

“Why to make you a Catholic, to take you also down to Rome.”

“Oh we’re going to Rome for our voyage de noces!” said Francie gaily.
“Just for a peep.”

“And won’t you have to have a Catholic marriage if They won’t consent to
a Protestant one.”

“We’re going to have a lovely one, just like one that Mme. de Brecourt
took me to see at the Madeleine.”

“And will it be at the Madeleine, too?”

“Yes, unless we have it at Notre Dame.”

“And how will your father and sister like that?”

“Our having it at Notre Dame?”

“Yes, or at the Madeleine. Your not having it at the American church.”

“Oh Delia wants it at the best place,” said Francie simply. Then she
added: “And you know poppa ain’t much on religion.”

“Well now that’s what I call a genuine fact, the sort I was talking
about,” Mr. Flack replied. Whereupon he at last took himself off,
repeating that he would come in two days later, at 3.15 sharp.

Francie gave an account of his visit to her sister, on the return of
the latter young lady, and mentioned the agreement they had come to in
relation to the drive. Delia brooded on it a while like a sitting
hen, so little did she know that it was right (“as” it was right Delia
usually said) that Francie should be so intimate with other gentlemen
after she was engaged.

“Intimate? You wouldn’t think it’s very intimate if you were to see me!”
 Francie cried with amusement.

“I’m sure I don’t want to see you,” Delia declared--the sharpness of
which made her sister suddenly strenuous.

“Delia Dosson, do you realise that if it hadn’t been for Mr. Flack we
would never have had that picture, and that if it hadn’t been for that
picture I should never have got engaged?”

“It would have been better if you hadn’t, if that’s the way you’re going
to behave. Nothing would induce me to go with you.”

This was what suited Francie, but she was nevertheless struck by Delia’s
rigour. “I’m only going to take him to see Mr. Waterlow.”

“Has he become all of a sudden too shy to go alone?”

“Well, you know Mr. Waterlow has a prejudice against him and has made
him feel it. You know Gaston told us so.”

“He told us HE couldn’t bear him; that’s what he told us,” said Delia.

“All the more reason I should be kind to him. Why Delia, do realise,”
 Francie went on.

“That’s just what I do,” returned the elder girl; “but things that are
very different from those you want me to. You have queer reasons.”

“I’ve others too that you may like better. He wants to put a piece in
the paper about it.”

“About your picture?”

“Yes, and about me. All about the whole thing.”

Delia stared a moment. “Well, I hope it will be a good one!” she said
with a groan of oppression as from the crushing majesty of their fate.




X

When Francie, two days later, passed with Mr. Flack into Charles
Waterlow’s studio she found Mme. de Cliche before the great canvas. She
enjoyed every positive sign that the Proberts took an interest in her,
and this was a considerable symptom, Gaston’s second sister’s coming all
that way--she lived over by the Invalides--to look at the portrait once
more. Francie knew she had seen it at an earlier stage; the work had
excited curiosity and discussion among the Proberts from the first of
their making her acquaintance, when they went into considerations about
it which had not occurred to the original and her companions--frequently
as, to our knowledge, these good people had conversed on the subject.
Gaston had told her that opinions differed much in the family as to the
merit of the work, and that Margaret, precisely, had gone so far as to
say that it might be a masterpiece of tone but didn’t make her look like
a lady. His father on the other hand had no objection to offer to the
character in which it represented her, but he didn’t think it well
painted. “Regardez-moi ca, et ca, et ca, je vous demande!” he had
exclaimed, making little dashes at the canvas with his glove, toward
mystifying spots, on occasions when the artist was not at hand. The
Proberts always fell into French when they spoke on a question of
art. “Poor dear papa, he only understands le vieux jeu!” Gaston had
explained, and he had still further to expound what he meant by the old
game. The brand-newness of Charles Waterlow’s game had already been a
bewilderment to Mr. Probert.

Francie remembered now--she had forgotten it--Margaret de Cliche’s
having told her she meant to come again. She hoped the marquise thought
by this time that, on canvas at least, she looked a little more like a
lady. Mme. de Cliche smiled at her at any rate and kissed her, as if
in fact there could be no mistake. She smiled also at Mr. Flack, on
Francie’s introducing him, and only looked grave when, after she had
asked where the others were--the papa and the grande soeur--the girl
replied that she hadn’t the least idea: her party consisted only of
herself and Mr. Flack. Then Mme. de Cliche’s grace stiffened, taking on
a shade that brought back Francie’s sense that she was the individual,
among all Gaston’s belongings, who had pleased her least from the first.
Mme. de Douves was superficially more formidable, but with her the
second impression was comparatively comforting. It was just this second
impression of the marquise that was not. There were perhaps others
behind it, but the girl hadn’t yet arrived at them. Mr. Waterlow
mightn’t have been very much prepossessed with Mr. Flack, but he was
none the less perfectly civil to him and took much trouble to show him
the work he had in hand, dragging out canvases, changing lights, moving
him off to see things at the other end of the great room. While the two
gentlemen were at a distance Mme. de Cliche expressed to Francie the
conviction that she would allow her to see her home: on which Francie
replied that she was not going home, but was going somewhere else with
Mr. Flack. And she explained, as if it simplified the matter, that this
gentleman was a big editor. Her sister-in-law that was to be echoed
the term and Francie developed her explanation. He was not the only big
editor, but one of the many big editors, of an enormous American paper.
He was going to publish an article--as big, as enormous, as all the rest
of the business--about her portrait. Gaston knew him perfectly: it was
Mr. Flack who had been the cause of Gaston’s being presented to her.
Mme. de Cliche looked across at him as if the inadequacy of the cause
projected an unfavourable light upon an effect hitherto perhaps not
exactly measured; she appealed as to whether Francie thought Gaston
would like her to drive about Paris alone with one of ces messieurs.
“I’m sure I don’t know. I never asked him!” said Francie. “He ought to
want me to be polite to a person who did so much for us.” Soon after
this Mme. de Cliche retired with no fresh sign of any sense of the
existence of Mr. Flack, though he stood in her path as she approached
the door. She didn’t kiss our young lady again, and the girl
observed that her leave-taking consisted of the simple words “Adieu
mademoiselle.” She had already noted that in proportion as the Proberts
became majestic they became articulately French. She and Mr. Flack
remained in the studio but a short time longer, and when they were
seated in the carriage again, at the door--they had come in Mr. Dosson’s
open landau--her companion said “And now where shall we go?” He spoke
as if on their way from the hotel he hadn’t touched upon the pleasant
vision of a little turn in the Bois. He had insisted then that the day
was made on purpose, the air full of spring. At present he seemed to
wish to give himself the pleasure of making his companion choose that
particular alternative. But she only answered rather impatiently:

“Wherever you like, wherever you like!” And she sat there swaying her
parasol, looking about her, giving no order.

“Au Bois,” said George Flack to the coachman, leaning back on the
soft cushions. For a few moments after the carriage had taken its easy
elastic start they were silent; but he soon began again. “Was that lady
one of your new relatives?”

“Do you mean one of Mr. Probert’s old ones? She’s his sister.”

“Is there any particular reason in that why she shouldn’t say
good-morning to me?”

“She didn’t want you to remain with me. She doesn’t like you to go round
with me. She wanted to carry me off.”

“What has she got against me?” Mr. Flack asked with a kind of portentous
calm.

Francie seemed to consider a little. “Oh it’s these funny French ideas.”

“Funny? Some of them are very base,” said George Flack.

His companion made no answer; she only turned her eyes to right
and left, admiring the splendid day and shining city. The great
architectural vista was fair: the tall houses, with their polished
shop-fronts, their balconies, their signs with accented letters, seemed
to make a glitter of gilt and crystal as they rose in the sunny air.
The colour of everything was cool and pretty and the sound of everything
gay; the sense of a costly spectacle was everywhere. “Well, I like Paris
anyway!” Francie exhaled at last with her little harmonising flatness.

“It’s lucky for you, since you’ve got to live here.”

“I haven’t got to; there’s no obligation. We haven’t settled anything
about that.”

“Hasn’t that lady settled it for you?”

“Yes, very likely she has,” said Francie placidly enough. “I don’t like
her so well as the others.”

“You like the others very much?”

“Of course I do. So would you if they had made so much of you.”

“That one at the studio didn’t make much of me, certainly,” Mr. Flack
declared.

“Yes, she’s the most haughty,” Francie allowed.

“Well, what is it all about?” her friend demanded. “Who are they
anyway?”

“Oh it would take me three hours to tell you,” the girl cheerfully
sighed. “They go back a thousand years.”

“Well, we’ve GOT a thousand years--I mean three hours.” And George Flack
settled himself more on his cushions and inhaled the pleasant air. “I
AM getting something out of this drive, Miss Francie,” he went on. “It’s
many a day since I’ve been to the old Bois. I don’t fool round much in
woods.”

Francie replied candidly that for her too the occasion was most
agreeable, and Mr. Flack pursued, looking round him with his hard smile,
irrelevantly but sociably: “Yes, these French ideas! I don’t see how you
can stand them. Those they have about young ladies are horrid.”

“Well, they tell me you like them better after you’re married.”

“Why after they’re married they’re worse--I mean the ideas. Every one
knows that.”

“Well, they can make you like anything, the way they talk,” Francie
said.

“And do they talk a great deal?”

“Well, I should think so. They don’t do much else, and all about the
queerest things--things I never heard of.”

“Ah THAT I’ll bet my life on!” Mr. Flack returned with understanding.

“Of course,” his companion obligingly proceeded, “‘ve had most
conversation with Mr. Probert.”

“The old gentleman?”

“No, very little with him. I mean with Gaston. But it’s not he that
has told me most--it’s Mme. de Brecourt. She’s great on life, on THEIR
life--it’s very interesting. She has told me all their histories, all
their troubles and complications.”

“Complications?” Mr. Flack threw off. “That’s what she calls them.
It seems very different from America. It’s just like a beautiful
story--they have such strange feelings. But there are things you can
see--without being told.”

“What sort of things?”

“Well, like Mme. de Cliche’s--” But Francie paused as if for a word.

Her friend was prompt with assistance. “Do you mean her complications?”

“Yes, and her husband’s. She has terrible ones. That’s why one must
forgive her if she’s rather peculiar. She’s very unhappy.”

“Do you mean through her husband?”

“Yes, he likes other ladies better. He flirts with Mme. de Brives.”

Mr. Flack’s hand closed over it. “Mme. de Brives?”

“Yes, she’s lovely,” said Francie. “She ain’t very young, but she’s
fearfully attractive. And he used to go every day to have tea with Mme.
de Villepreux. Mme. de Cliche can’t bear Mme. de Villepreux.”

“Well, he seems a kind of MEAN man,” George Flack moralised.

“Oh his mother was very bad. That was one thing they had against the
marriage.”

“Who had?--against what marriage?”

“When Maggie Probert became engaged.”

“Is that what they call her--Maggie?”

“Her brother does; but every one else calls her Margot. Old Mme. de
Cliche had a horrid reputation. Every one hated her.”

“Except those, I suppose, who liked her too much!” Mr. Flack permitted
himself to guess. “And who’s Mme. de Villepreux?” he proceeded.

“She’s the daughter of Mme. de Marignac.”

“And who’s THAT old sinner?” the young man asked.

“Oh I guess she’s dead,” said Francie. “She used to be a great friend of
Mr. Probert--of Gaston’s father.”

“He used to go to tea with her?”

“Almost every day. Susan says he has never been the same since her
death.”

“The way they do come out with ‘em!” Mr. Flack chuckled. “And who the
mischief’s Susan?”

“Why Mme. de Brecourt. Mr. Probert just loved Mme. de Marignac. Mme.
de Villepreux isn’t so nice as her mother. She was brought up with the
Proberts, like a sister, and now she carries on with Maxime.”

“With Maxime?”

“That’s M. de Cliche.”

“Oh I see--I see!” and George Flack engulfed it. They had reached the
top of the Champs Elysees and were passing below the wondrous arch to
which that gentle eminence forms a pedestal and which looks down even
on splendid Paris from its immensity and across at the vain mask of the
Tuileries and the river-moated Louvre and the twin towers of Notre Dame
painted blue by the distance. The confluence of carriages--a sounding
stream in which our friends became engaged--rolled into the large avenue
leading to the Bois de Boulogne. Mr. Flack evidently enjoyed the scene;
he gazed about him at their neighbours, at the villas and gardens
on either hand; he took in the prospect of the far-stretching brown
boskages and smooth alleys of the wood, of the hour they had yet to
spend there, of the rest of Francie’s pleasant prattle, of the place
near the lake where they could alight and walk a little; even of the
bench where they might sit down. “I see, I see,” he repeated with
appreciation. “You make me feel quite as if I were in the grand old
monde.”




XI

One day at noon, shortly before the time for which Gaston had announced
his return, a note was brought Francie from Mme. de Brecourt. It caused
her some agitation, though it contained a clause intended to guard
her against vain fears. “Please come to me the moment you’ve received
this--I’ve sent the carriage. I’ll explain when you get here what I want
to see you about. Nothing has happened to Gaston. We are all here.” The
coupe from the Place Beauvau was waiting at the door of the hotel, and
the girl had but a hurried conference with her father and sister--if
conference it could be called in which vagueness on the one side melted
into blankness on the other. “It’s for something bad--something bad,”
 Francie none the less said while she tied her bonnet, though she was
unable to think what it could be. Delia, who looked a good deal scared,
offered to accompany her; on which Mr. Dosson made the first remark of
a practical character in which he had indulged in relation to his
daughter’s alliance.

“No you won’t--no you won’t, my dear. They may whistle for Francie, but
let them see that they can’t whistle for all of us.” It was the first
sign he had given of being jealous of the dignity of the Dossons. That
question had never troubled him.

“I know what it is,” said Delia while she arranged her sister’s
garments. “They want to talk about religion. They’ve got the priests;
there’s some bishop or perhaps some cardinal. They want to baptise you.”

“Then you’d better take a waterproof!” Francie’s father called after her
as she flitted away.

She wondered, rolling toward the Place Beauvau, what they were all there
for; that announcement balanced against the reassurance conveyed in
the phrase about Gaston. She liked them individually, but in their
collective form they made her uneasy. In their family parties there was
always something of the tribunal. Mme. de Brecourt came out to meet her
in the vestibule, drawing her quickly into a small room--not the salon;
Francie knew it as her hostess’s “own room,” a lovely boudoir--in which,
considerably to the girl’s relief, the rest of the family were not
assembled. Yet she guessed in a moment that they were near at hand--they
were waiting. Susan looked flushed and strange; she had a queer smile;
she kissed her as if she didn’t know she was doing it. She laughed
as she greeted her, but her laugh was extravagant; it was a different
demonstration every way from any Francie had hitherto had to reckon
with. By the time our young lady had noted these things she was sitting
beside her on a sofa and Mme. de Brecourt had her hand, which she held
so tight that it almost hurt her. Susan’s eyes were in their nature
salient, but on this occasion they seemed to have started out of her
head.

“We’re upside down--terribly agitated. A thunderbolt has fallen on the
house.”

“What’s the matter--what’s the matter?” Francie asked, pale and with
parted lips. She had a sudden wild idea that Gaston might have found out
in America that her father had no money, had lost it all; that it had
been stolen during their long absence. But would he cast her off for
that?

“You must understand the closeness of our union with you from our
sending for you this way--the first, the only person--in a crisis. Our
joys are your joys and our indignations are yours.”

“What IS the matter, PLEASE?” the girl repeated. Their “indignations”
 opened up a gulf; it flashed upon her, with a shock of mortification
for the belated idea, that something would have come out: a piece in
the paper, from Mr. Flack, about her portrait and even a little about
herself. But that was only more mystifying, for certainly Mr. Flack
could only have published something pleasant--something to be proud
of. Had he by some incredible perversity or treachery stated that the
picture was bad, or even that SHE was? She grew dizzy, remembering
how she had refused him, and how little he had liked it, that day at
Saint-Germain. But they had made that up over and over, especially when
they sat so long on a bench together (the time they drove) in the Bois
de Boulogne.

“Oh the most awful thing; a newspaper sent this morning from America to
my father--containing two horrible columns of vulgar lies and scandal
about our family, about all of us, about you, about your picture,
about poor Marguerite, calling her ‘Margot,’ about Maxime and Leonie de
Villepreux, saying he’s her lover, about all our affairs, about Gaston,
about your marriage, about your sister and your dresses and your
dimples, about our darling father, whose history it professes to relate
in the most ignoble, the most revolting terms. Papa’s in the most awful
state!” and Mme. de Brecourt panted to take breath. She had spoken with
the volubility of horror and passion. “You’re outraged with us and you
must suffer with us,” she went on. “But who has done it? Who has done
it? Who has done it?”

“Why Mr. Flack--Mr. Flack!” Francie quickly replied. She was appalled,
overwhelmed; but her foremost feeling was the wish not to appear to
disavow her knowledge.

“Mr. Flack? do you mean that awful person--? He ought to be shot,
he ought to be burnt alive. Maxime will kill him, Maxime’s in an
unspeakable rage. Everything’s at end, we’ve been served up to
the rabble, we shall have to leave Paris. How could he know such
things?--and they all so infamously false!” The poor woman poured forth
her woe in questions, contradictions, lamentations; she didn’t know
what to ask first, against what to protest. “Do you mean that wretch
Marguerite saw you with at Mr. Waterlow’s? Oh Francie, what has
happened? She had a feeling then, a dreadful foreboding. She saw you
afterwards--walking with him--in the Bois.”

“Well, I didn’t see her,” the girl said.

“You were talking with him--you were too absorbed: that’s what Margot
remembers. Oh Francie, Francie!” wailed Mme. de Brecourt, whose distress
was pitiful.

“She tried to interfere at the studio, but I wouldn’t let her. He’s
an old friend--a friend of poppa’s--and I like him very much. What my
father allows, that’s not for others to criticise!” Francie continued.
She was frightened, extremely frightened, at her companion’s air of
tragedy and at the dreadful consequences she alluded to, consequences of
an act she herself didn’t know, couldn’t comprehend nor measure yet.
But there was an instinct of bravery in her which threw her into blind
defence, defence even of George Flack, though it was a part of her
consternation that on her too he should have practised a surprise--it
would appear to be some self-seeking deception.

“Oh how can you bear with such brutes, how can your father--? What devil
has he paid to tattle to him?”

“You scare me awfully--you terrify me,” the girl could but plead.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about. I haven’t seen it, I don’t
understand it. Of course I’ve talked to Mr. Flack.”

“Oh Francie, don’t say it--don’t SAY it! Dear child, you haven’t talked
to him in that fashion: vulgar horrors and such a language!” Mme. de
Brecourt came nearer, took both her hands now, drew her closer, seemed
to supplicate her for some disproof, some antidote to the nightmare.
“You shall see the paper; they’ve got it in the other room--the most
disgusting sheet. Margot’s reading it to her husband; he can’t read
English, if you can call it English: such a style of the gutter! Papa
tried to translate it to Maxime, but he couldn’t, he was too sick.
There’s a quantity about Mme. de Marignac--imagine only! And a quantity
about Jeanne and Raoul and their economies in the country. When they see
it in Brittany--heaven preserve us!”

Francie had turned very white; she looked for a minute at the carpet.
“And what does it say about me?”

“Some trash about your being the great American beauty, with the
most odious details, and your having made a match among the ‘rare old
exclusives.’ And the strangest stuff about your father--his having
gone into a ‘store’ at the age of twelve. And something about your poor
sister--heaven help us! And a sketch of our career in Paris, as
they call it, and the way we’ve pushed and got on and our ridiculous
pretensions. And a passage about Blanche de Douves, Raoul’s sister, who
had that disease--what do they call it?--that she used to steal things
in shops: do you see them reading THAT? And how did he know such a
thing? It’s ages ago, it’s dead and buried!”

“You told me, you told me yourself,” said Francie quickly. She turned
red the instant she had spoken.

“Don’t say it’s YOU--don’t, don’t, my darling!” cried Mme. de Brecourt,
who had stared and glared at her. “That’s what I want, that’s what you
must do, that’s what I see you this way for first alone. I’ve answered
for you, you know; you must repudiate the remotest connexion; you must
deny it up to the hilt. Margot suspects you--she has got that idea--she
has given it to the others. I’ve told them they ought to be ashamed,
that it’s an outrage to all we know you and love you for. I’ve done
everything for the last hour to protect you. I’m your godmother, you
know, and you mustn’t disappoint me. You’re incapable, and you must say
so, face to face, to my father. Think of Gaston, cherie; HE’LL have seen
it over there, alone, far from us all. Think of HIS horror and of HIS
anguish and of HIS faith, of what HE would expect of you.” Mme. de
Brecourt hurried on, and her companion’s bewilderment deepened to see
how the tears had risen to her eyes and were pouring down her cheeks.
“You must say to my father, face to face, that you’re incapable--that
you’re stainless.”

“Stainless?” Francie bleated it like a bewildered interrogative lamb.
But the sheep-dog had to be faced. “Of course I knew he wanted to write
a piece about the picture--and about my marriage.”

“About your marriage--of course you knew? Then, wretched girl, you’re
at the bottom of ALL!” cried Mme. de Brecourt, flinging herself away,
falling back on the sofa, prostrate there and covering her face with her
hands.

“He told me--he told me when I went with him to the studio!” Francie
asseverated loud. “But he seems to have printed more.”

“MORE? I should think so!” And Mme. de Brecourt rebounded, standing
before her. “And you LET him--about yourself? You gave him preposterous
facts?”

“I told him--I told him--I don’t know what. It was for his paper--he
wants everything. It’s a very fine paper,” said the girl.

“A very fine paper?” Mme. de Brecourt flushed, with parted lips.
“Have you SEEN, have you touched the hideous sheet? Ah my brother, my
brother!” she quavered again, turning away.

“If your brother were here you wouldn’t talk to me this way--he’d
protect me, Gaston would!” cried Francie, on her feet, seizing her
little muff and moving to the door.

“Go away, go away or they’ll kill you!” her friend went on excitedly.
“After all I’ve done for you--after the way I’ve lied for you!” And she
sobbed, trying to repress her sobs.

Francie, at this, broke out into a torrent of tears. “I’ll go home.
Poppa, poppa!” she almost shrieked, reaching the door.

“Oh your father--he has been a nice father, bringing you up in such
ideas!” These words followed her with infinite scorn, but almost as Mme.
de Brecourt uttered them, struck by a sound, she sprang after the girl,
seized her, drew her back and held her a moment listening before
she could pass out. “Hush--hush--they’re coming in here, they’re too
anxious! Deny--deny it--say you know nothing! Your sister must have said
things--and such things: say it all comes from HER!”

“Oh you dreadful--is that what YOU do?” cried Francie, shaking herself
free. The door opened as she spoke and Mme. de Brecourt walked quickly
to the window, turning her back. Mme. de Cliche was there and Mr.
Probert and M. de Brecourt and M. de Cliche. They entered in silence and
M. de Brecourt, coming last, closed the door softly behind him. Francie
had never been in a court of justice, but if she had had that experience
these four persons would have reminded her of the jury filing back into
their box with their verdict. They all looked at her hard as she stood
in the middle of the room; Mme. de Brecourt gazed out of the window,
wiping her tears; Mme. de Cliche grasped a newspaper, crumpled and
partly folded. Francie got a quick impression, moving her eyes from one
face to another, that old Mr. Probert was the worst; his mild ravaged
expression was terrible. He was the one who looked at her least; he went
to the fireplace and leaned on the mantel with his head in his hands. He
seemed ten years older.

“Ah mademoiselle, mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” said Maxime de Cliche
slowly, impressively, in a tone of the most respectful but most poignant
reproach.

“Have you seen it--have they sent it to you--?” his wife asked,
thrusting the paper toward her. “It’s quite at your service!” But as
Francie neither spoke nor took it she tossed it upon the sofa, where, as
it opened, falling, the girl read the name of the Reverberator. Mme. de
Cliche carried her head very far aloft.

“She has nothing to do with it--it’s just as I told you--she’s
overwhelmed,” said Mme. de Brecourt, remaining at the window.

“You’d do well to read it--it’s worth the trouble,” Alphonse de Brecourt
remarked, going over to his wife. Francie saw him kiss her as he noted
her tears. She was angry at her own; she choked and swallowed them; they
seemed somehow to put her in the wrong.

“Have you had no idea that any such monstrosity would be perpetrated?”
 Mme. de Cliche went on, coming nearer to her. She had a manner of forced
calmness--as if she wished it to be understood that she was one of those
who could be reasonable under any provocation, though she were trembling
within--which made Francie draw back. “C’est pourtant rempli de
choses--which we know you to have been told of--by what folly, great
heaven! It’s right and left--no one’s spared--it’s a deluge of the
lowest insult. My sister perhaps will have told you of the apprehensions
I had--I couldn’t resist them, though I thought of nothing so awful
as this, God knows--the day I met you at Mr. Waterlow’s with your
journalist.”

“I’ve told her everything--don’t you see she’s aneantie? Let her go,
let her go!” cried Mme. de Brecourt all distrustfully and still at the
window.

“Ah your journalist, your journalist, mademoiselle!” said Maxime de
Cliche. “I’m very sorry to have to say anything in regard to any friend
of yours that can give you so little pleasure; but I promise myself the
satisfaction of administering him with these hands a dressing he won’t
forget, if I may trouble you so far as to ask you to let him know it!”

M. de Cliche fingered the points of his moustache; he diffused some
powerful scent; his eyes were dreadful to Francie. She wished Mr.
Probert would say something kind to her; but she had now determined to
be strong. They were ever so many against one; Gaston was far away and
she felt heroic. “If you mean Mr. Flack--I don’t know what you mean,”
 she said as composedly as possible to M. de Cliche. “Mr. Flack has gone
to London.”

At this M. de Brecourt gave a free laugh and his brother-in-law replied:
“Ah it’s easy to go to London.”

“They like such things there; they do them more and more. It’s as bad as
America!” Mme. de Cliche declared.

“Why have you sent for me--what do you all want me to do? You might
explain--I’m only an American girl!” said Francie, whose being only an
American girl didn’t prevent her pretty head from holding itself now as
high as Mme. de Cliche’s.

Mme. de Brecourt came back to her quickly, laying her hand on her arm.
“You’re very nervous--you’d much better go home. I’ll explain everything
to them--I’ll make them understand. The carriage is here--it had orders
to wait.”

“I’m not in the least nervous, but I’ve made you all so,” Francie
brought out with the highest spirit.

“I defend you, my dear young lady--I insist that you’re only a wretched
victim like ourselves,” M. de Brecourt remarked, approaching her with
a smile. “I see the hand of a woman in it, you know,” he went on to the
others; “for there are strokes of a vulgarity that a man doesn’t sink
to--he can’t, his very organisation prevents him--even if he be the
dernier des goujats. But please don’t doubt that I’ve maintained that
woman not to be you.”

“The way you talk! _I_ don’t know how to write,” Francie impatiently
quavered.

“My poor child, when one knows you as I do--!” murmured Mme. de Brecourt
with an arm round her.

“There’s a lady who helps him--Mr. Flack has told me so,” the girl
continued. “She’s a literary lady--here in Paris--she writes what
he tells her. I think her name’s Miss Topping, but she calls herself
Florine--or Dorine,” Francie added.

“Miss Dosson, you’re too rare!” Marguerite de Cliche exclaimed, giving a
long moan of pain which ended in an incongruous laugh. “Then you’ve been
three to it,” she went on; “that accounts for its perfection!”

Francie disengaged herself again from Mme. de Brecourt and went to Mr.
Probert, who stood looking down at the fire with his back to her. “Mr.
Probert, I’m very sorry for what I’ve done to distress you; I had no
idea you’d all feel so badly. I didn’t mean any harm. I thought you’d
like it.”

The old man turned a little, bending his eyes on her, but without taking
her hand as she had hoped. Usually when they met he kissed her. He
didn’t look angry now, he only looked very ill. A strange, inarticulate
sound, a chorus of amazement and mirth, came from the others when she
said she thought they’d like it; and indeed poor Francie was far from
being able to measure the droll effect of that speech. “Like it--LIKE
IT?” said Mr. Probert, staring at her as if a little afraid of her.

“What do you mean? She admits--she admits!” Mme. de Cliche exulted to
her sister. “Did you arrange it all that day in the Bois--to punish me
for having tried to separate you?” she pursued to the poor child, who
stood gazing up piteously at the old man.

“I don’t know what he has published--I haven’t seen it--I don’t
understand. I thought it was only to be a piece about me,” she said to
him.

“‘About me’!” M. de Cliche repeated in English. “Elle est divine!” He
turned away, raising his shoulders and hands and then letting them fall.

Mme. de Brecourt had picked up the newspaper; she rolled it
together, saying to Francie that she must take it home, take it home
immediately--then she’d see. She only seemed to wish to get her out of
the room. But Mr. Probert had fixed their flushed little guest with his
sick stare. “You gave information for that? You desired it?”

“Why _I_ didn’t desire it--but Mr. Flack did.”

“Why do you know such ruffians? Where was your father?” the old man
groaned.

“I thought he’d just be nice about my picture and give pleasure to Mr.
Waterlow,” Francie went on. “I thought he’d just speak about my being
engaged and give a little account; so many people in America would be
interested.”

“So many people in America--that’s just the dreadful thought, my dear,”
 said Mme. de Brecourt kindly. “Foyons, put it in your muff and tell
us what you think of it.” And she continued to thrust forward the
scandalous journal.

But Francie took no notice of it; she looked round from Mr. Probert
at the others. “I told Gaston I’d certainly do something you wouldn’t
like.”

“Well, he’ll believe it now!” cried Mme. de Cliche.

“My poor child, do you think he’ll like it any better?” asked Mme. de
Brecourt.

Francie turned upon her beautiful dilated eyes in which a world of new
wonders and fears had suddenly got itself reflected. “He’ll see it over
there--he has seen it now.”

“Oh my dear, you’ll have news of him. Don’t be afraid!” broke in high
derision from Mme. de Cliche.

“Did HE send you the paper?” her young friend went on to Mr. Probert.

“It was not directed in his hand,” M. de Brecourt pronounced. “There was
some stamp on the band--it came from the office.”

“Mr. Flack--is that his hideous name?--must have seen to that,” Mme. de
Brecourt suggested.

“Or perhaps Florine,” M. de Cliche interposed. “I should like to get
hold of Florine!”

“I DID--I did tell him so!” Francie repeated with all her fevered
candour, alluding to her statement of a moment before and speaking as if
she thought the circumstance detracted from the offence.

“So did I--so did we all!” said Mme. de Cliche.

“And will he suffer--as you suffer?” Francie continued, appealing to Mr.
Probert.

“Suffer, suffer? He’ll die!” cried the old man. “However, I won’t answer
for him; he’ll tell you himself, when he returns.”

“He’ll die?” echoed Francie with the eyes of a child at the pantomime
who has found the climax turning to demons or monsters or too much
gunpowder.

“He’ll never return--how can he show himself?” said Mme. de Cliche.

“That’s not true--he’ll come back to stand by me!” the girl flashed out.

“How couldn’t you feel us to be the last--the very last?” asked Mr.
Probert with great gentleness. “How couldn’t you feel my poor son to be
the last--?”

“C’est un sens qui lui manque!” shrilled implacably Mme. de Cliche.

“Let her go, papa--do let her go home,” Mme. de Brecourt pleaded.
“Surely. That’s the only place for her to-day,” the elder sister
continued.

“Yes, my child--you oughtn’t to be here. It’s your father--he ought to
understand,” said Mr. Probert.

“For God’s sake don’t send for him--let it all stop!” And Mme. de Cliche
made wild gestures.

Francie looked at her as she had never looked at any one in her life,
and then said: “Good-bye, Mr. Probert--good-bye, Susan.”

“Give her your arm--take her to the carriage,” she heard Mme. de
Brecourt growl to her husband. She got to the door she hardly knew
how--she was only conscious that Susan held her once more long enough to
kiss her. Poor Susan wanted to comfort her; that showed how bad--feeling
as she did--she believed the whole business would yet be. It would be
bad because Gaston, Gaston--! Francie didn’t complete that thought,
yet only Gaston was in her mind as she hurried to the carriage. M. de
Brecourt hurried beside her; she wouldn’t take his arm. But he opened
the door for her and as she got in she heard him murmur in the strangest
and most unexpected manner: “You’re charming, mademoiselle--charming,
charming!”




XII

Her absence had not been long and when she re-entered the familiar salon
at the hotel she found her father and sister sitting there together
as if they had timed her by their watches, a prey, both of them, to
curiosity and suspense. Mr. Dosson however gave no sign of impatience;
he only looked at her in silence through the smoke of his cigar--he
profaned the red satin splendour with perpetual fumes--as she burst into
the room. An irruption she made of her desired reappearance; she rushed
to one of the tables, flinging down her muff and gloves, while Delia,
who had sprung up as she came in, caught her closely and glared into her
face with a “Francie Dosson, what HAVE you been through?” Francie said
nothing at first, only shutting her eyes and letting her sister do what
she would with her. “She has been crying, poppa--she HAS,” Delia almost
shouted, pulling her down upon a sofa and fairly shaking her as she
continued. “Will you please tell? I’ve been perfectly wild! Yes you
have, you dreadful--!” the elder girl insisted, kissing her on the eyes.
They opened at this compassionate pressure and Francie rested their
troubled light on her father, who had now risen to his feet and stood
with his back to the fire.

“Why, chicken,” said Mr. Dosson, “you look as if you had had quite a
worry.”

“I told you I should--I told you, I told you!” Francie broke out with a
trembling voice. “And now it’s come!”

“You don’t mean to say you’ve DONE anything?” cried Delia, very white.

“It’s all over, it’s all over!” With which Francie’s face braved denial.

“Are you crazy, Francie?” Delia demanded. “I’m sure you look as if you
were.”

“Ain’t you going to be married, childie?” asked Mr. Dosson all
considerately, but coming nearer to her.

Francie sprang up, releasing herself from her sister, and threw her
arms round him. “Will you take me away, poppa? will you take me right
straight away?”

“Of course I will, my precious. I’ll take you anywhere. I don’t want
anything--it wasn’t MY idea!” And Mr. Dosson and Delia looked at each
other while the girl pressed her face upon his shoulder.

“I never heard such trash--you can’t behave that way! Has he got engaged
to some one else--in America?” Delia threw out.

“Why if it’s over it’s over. I guess it’s all right,” said Mr. Dosson,
kissing his younger daughter. “I’ll go back or I’ll go on. I’ll go
anywhere you like.”

“You won’t have your daughters insulted, I presume!” Delia cried. “If
you don’t tell me this moment what has happened,” she pursued to her
sister, “I’ll drive straight round there and make THEM.”

“HAVE they insulted you, sweetie?” asked the old man, bending over his
child, who simply leaned on him with her hidden face and no sound of
tears. Francie raised her head, turning round to their companion. “Did I
ever tell you anything else--did I ever believe in it for an hour?”

“Oh well, if you’ve done it on purpose to triumph over me we might as
well go home, certainly. But I guess,” Delia added, “you had better just
wait till Gaston comes.”

“It will be worse when he comes--if he thinks the same as they do.”

“HAVE they insulted you--have they?” Mr. Dosson repeated while the smoke
of his cigar, curling round the question, gave him the air of putting it
with placidity.

“They think I’ve insulted THEM--they’re in an awful state--they’re
almost dead. Mr. Flack has put it into the paper--everything, I
don’t know what--and they think it’s too wicked. They were all there
together--all at me at once, weeping and wailing and gnashing their
teeth. I never saw people so affected.”

Delia’s face grew big with her stare. “So affected?”

“Ah yes, I guess there’s a good deal OF THAT,” said Mr. Dosson.

“It’s too real--too terrible; you don’t understand. It’s all printed
there--that they’re immoral, and everything about them; everything
that’s private and dreadful,” Francie explained.

“Immoral, is that so?” Mr. Dosson threw off.

“And about me too, and about Gaston and my marriage, and all sorts
of personalities, and all the names, and Mme. de Villepreux, and
everything. It’s all printed there and they’ve read it. It says one of
them steals.”

“Will you be so good as to tell me what you’re talking about?” Delia
enquired sternly. “Where is it printed and what have we got to do with
it?”

“Some one sent it, and I told Mr. Flack.”

“Do you mean HIS paper? Oh the horrid ape!” Delia cried with passion.

“Do they mind so what they see in the papers?” asked Mr. Dosson. “I
guess they haven’t seen what I’ve seen. Why there used to be things
about ME--”

“Well, it IS about us too--about every one. They think it’s the same as
if I wrote it,” Francie ruefully mentioned.

“Well, you know what you COULD do!” And Mr. Dosson beamed at her for
common cheer.

“Do you mean that piece about your picture--that you told me about when
you went with him again to see it?” Delia demanded.

“Oh I don’t know what piece it is; I haven’t seen it.”

“Haven’t seen it? Didn’t they show it to you?”

“Yes, but I couldn’t read it. Mme. de Brecourt wanted me to take it--but
I left it behind.”

“Well, that’s LIKE you--like the Tauchnitzes littering up our track.
I’ll be bound I’d see it,” Delia declared. “Hasn’t it come, doesn’t it
always come?”

“I guess we haven’t had the last--unless it’s somewhere round,” said Mr.
Dosson.

“Poppa, go out and get it--you can buy it on the boulevard!” Delia
continued. “Francie, what DID you want to tell him?”

“I didn’t know. I was just conversing. He seemed to take so much
interest,” Francie pleaded.

“Oh he’s a deep one!” groaned Delia.

“Well, if folks are immoral you can’t keep it out of the papers--and I
don’t know as you ought to want to,” Mr. Dosson remarked. “If they ARE
I’m glad to know it, lovey.” And he gave his younger daughter a glance
apparently intended to show that in this case he should know what to do.

But Francie was looking at her sister as if her attention had been
arrested. “How do you mean--‘a deep one’?”

“Why he wanted to break it off, the fiend!”

Francie stared; then a deeper flush leapt to her face, already mottled
as with the fine footprints of the Proberts, dancing for pain. “To break
off my engagement?”

“Yes, just that. But I’ll be hanged if he shall. Poppa, will you allow
that?”

“Allow what?”

“Why Mr. Flack’s vile interference. You won’t let him do as he likes
with us, I suppose, will you?”

“It’s all done--it’s all done!” said Francie. The tears had suddenly
started into her eyes again.

“Well, he’s so smart that it IS likely he’s too smart,” her father
allowed. “But what did they want you to do about it?--that’s what _I_
want to know?”

“They wanted me to say I knew nothing about it--but I couldn’t.”

“But you didn’t and you don’t--if you haven’t even read it!” Delia
almost yelled.

“Where IS the d---d thing?” their companion asked, looking helplessly
about him.

“On the boulevard, at the very first of those kiosks you come to. That
old woman has it--the one who speaks English--she always has it. Do go
and get it--DO!” And Delia pushed him, looked for his hat for him.

“I knew he wanted to print something and I can’t say I didn’t!” Francie
said. “I thought he’d crack up my portrait and that Mr. Waterlow would
like that, and Gaston and every one. And he talked to me about the
paper--he’s always doing that and always was--and I didn’t see the harm.
But even just knowing him--they think that’s vile.”

“Well, I should hope we can know whom we like!”--and Delia bounced
fairly round as from the force of her high spirit.

Mr. Dosson had put on his hat--he was going out for the paper. “Why he
kept us alive last year,” he uttered in tribute.

“Well, he seems to have killed us now,” Delia cried.

“Well, don’t give up an old friend,” her father urged with his hand on
the door. “And don’t back down on anything you’ve done.”

“Lord, what a fuss about an old newspaper!” Delia went on in her
exasperation. “It must be about two weeks old anyway. Didn’t they ever
see a society-paper before?”

“They can’t have seen much,” said Mr. Dosson. He paused still with his
hand on the door. “Don’t you worry--Gaston will make it all right.”

“Gaston?--it will kill Gaston!”

“Is that what they say?” Delia demanded.

“Gaston will never look at me again.”

“Well then he’ll have to look at ME,” said Mr. Dosson.

“Do you mean that he’ll give you up--he’ll be so CRAWLING?” Delia went
on.

“They say he’s just the one who’ll feel it most. But I’m the one who
does that,” said Francie with a strange smile.

“They’re stuffing you with lies--because THEY don’t like it. He’ll be
tender and true,” Delia glared.

“When THEY hate me?--Never!” And Francie shook her head slowly, still
with her smile of softness. “That’s what he cared for most--to make them
like me.”

“And isn’t he a gentleman, I should like to know?” asked Delia.

“Yes, and that’s why I won’t marry him--if I’ve injured him.”

“Shucks! he has seen the papers over there. You wait till he comes,” Mr.
Dosson enjoined, passing out of the room.

The girls remained there together and after a moment Delia resumed.
“Well, he has got to fix it--that’s one thing I can tell you.”

“Who has got to fix it?”

“Why that villainous man. He has got to publish another piece saying
it’s all false or all a mistake.”

“Yes, you’d better make him,” said Francie with a weak laugh. “You’d
better go after him--down to Nice.”

“You don’t mean to say he’s gone down to Nice?”

“Didn’t he say he was going there as soon as he came back from
London--going right through without stopping?”

“I don’t know but he did,” said Delia. Then she added: “The mean
coward!”

“Why do you say that? He can’t hide at Nice--they can find him there.”

“Are they going after him?”

“They want to shoot him--to stab him, I don’t know what--those men.”

“Well, I wish they would,” said Delia.

“They’d better shoot me. I shall defend him. I shall protect him,”
 Francie went on.

“How can you protect him? You shall never speak to him again!” her
sister engaged.

Francie had a pause. “I can protect him without speaking to him. I can
tell the simple truth--that he didn’t print a word but what I told him.”

“I’d like to see him not!” Delia fairly hooted. “When did he grow so
particular? He fixed it up,” she said with assurance. “They always do
in the papers--they’d be ashamed if they didn’t. Well now he has got to
bring out a piece praising them up--praising them to the skies: that’s
what he has got to do!” she wound up with decision.

“Praising them up? They’ll hate that worse,” Francie returned musingly.

Delia stared. “What on earth then do they want?”

Francie had sunk to the sofa; her eyes were fixed on the carpet. She
gave no reply to this question but presently said: “We had better go
to-morrow, the first hour that’s possible.”

“Go where? Do you mean to Nice?”

“I don’t care where. Anywhere to get away.”

“Before Gaston comes--without seeing him?”

“I don’t want to see him. When they were all ranting and raving at me
just now I wished he was there--I told them so. But now I don’t feel
like that--I can never see him again.”

“I don’t suppose YOU’RE crazy, are you?” Delia returned.

“I can’t tell him it wasn’t me--I can’t, I can’t!” her companion went
on.

Delia planted herself in front of her. “Francie Dosson, if you’re going
to tell him you’ve done anything wrong you might as well stop before you
begin. Didn’t you hear how poppa put it?”

“I’m sure I don’t know,” Francie said listlessly.

“‘Don’t give up an old friend--there’s nothing on earth so mean.’ Now
isn’t Gaston Probert an old friend?”

“It will be very simple--he’ll give me up.”

“Then he’ll be worse than a worm.”

“Not in the least--he’ll give me up as he took me. He’d never have asked
me to marry him if he hadn’t been able to get THEM to accept me: he
thinks everything in life of THEM. If they cast me off now he’ll do just
the same. He’ll have to choose between us, and when it comes to that
he’ll never choose me.”

“He’ll never choose Mr. Flack, if that’s what you mean--if you’re going
to identify yourself so with HIM!”

“Oh I wish he’d never been born!” Francie wailed; after which she
suddenly shivered. And then she added that she was sick--she was going
to bed, and her sister took her off to her room.

Mr. Dosson that afternoon, sitting by his younger daughter’s bedside,
read the dreadful “piece” out to both his children from the copy of the
Reverberator he had secured on the boulevard. It is a remarkable fact
that as a family they were rather disappointed in this composition, in
which their curiosity found less to repay it than it had expected, their
resentment against Mr. Flack less to stimulate it, their fluttering
effort to take the point of view of the Proberts less to sustain it, and
their acceptance of the promulgation of Francie’s innocent remarks as a
natural incident of the life of the day less to make them reconsider it.
The letter from Paris appeared lively, “chatty,” highly calculated to
please, and so far as the personalities contained in it were concerned
Mr. Dosson wanted to know if they weren’t aware over here of the charges
brought every day against the most prominent men in Boston. “If there
was anything in that style they might talk,” he said; and he scanned
the effusion afresh with a certain surprise at not finding in it some
imputation of pecuniary malversation. The effect of an acquaintance with
the text was to depress Delia, who didn’t exactly see what there was in
it to take back or explain away. However, she was aware there were some
points they didn’t understand, and doubtless these were the scandalous
places--the things that had so worked up the Proberts. But why should
they have minded if other people didn’t understand the allusions (these
were peculiar, but peculiarly incomprehensible) any better than she did?
The whole thing struck Francie herself as infinitely less lurid than
Mme. de Brecourt’s account of it, and the part about her own situation
and her beautiful picture seemed to make even less of the subject than
it easily might have done. It was scanty, it was “skimpy,” and if Mr.
Waterlow was offended it wouldn’t be because they had published too much
about him. It was nevertheless clear to her that there were a lot of
things SHE hadn’t told Mr. Flack, as well as a great many she had:
perhaps those were the things that lady had put in--Florine or
Dorine--the one she had mentioned at Mme. de Brecourt’s.

All the same, if the communication in the Reverberator let them down, at
the hotel, more gently than had seemed likely and bristled so much less
than was to have been feared with explanations of the anguish of the
Proberts, this didn’t diminish the girl’s sense of responsibility
nor make the case a whit less grave. It only showed how sensitive and
fastidious the Proberts were and therefore with what difficulty they
would come round to condonation. Moreover Francie made another reflexion
as she lay there--for Delia kept her in bed nearly three days, feeling
this to be for the moment at any rate an effectual reply to any absurd
heroics about leaving Paris. Perhaps they had got “case-hardened”
 Francie said to herself; perhaps they had read so many such bad things
that they had lost the delicacy of their palate, as people were said to
do who lived on food too violently spiced. Then, very weak and vague and
passive as she was now, in the bedimmed room, in the soft Parisian bed
and with Delia treating her as much as possible like a sick person, she
thought of the lively and chatty letters they had always seen in the
papers and wondered if they ALL meant a violation of sanctities, a
convulsion of homes, a burning of smitten faces, a rupture of girls’
engagements. It was present to her as an agreeable negative, I must add,
that her father and sister took no strenuous view of her responsibility
or of their own: they neither brought the matter home to her as a crime
nor made her worse through her feeling them anxiously understate their
blame. There was a pleasant cheerful helplessness in her father on this
head as on every other. There could be no more discussion among them on
such a question than there had ever been, for none was needed to show
that for these candid minds the newspapers and all they contained were
a part of the general fatality of things, of the recurrent freshness
of the universe, coming out like the sun in the morning or the stars at
night or the wind and the weather at all times.

The thing that worried Francie most while Delia kept her in bed was the
apprehension of what her father might do; but this was not a fear
of what he might do to Mr. Flack. He would go round perhaps to Mr.
Probert’s or to Mme. de Brecourt’s and reprimand them for having made
things so rough to his “chicken.” It was true she had scarcely ever seen
him reprimand any one for anything; but on the other hand nothing like
this had ever happened before to her or to Delia. They had made each
other cry once or twice, but no one else had ever made them, and no one
had ever broken out on them that way and frightened them half to death.
Francie wanted her father not to go round; she had a sense that
those other people had somehow stores of comparison, of propriety, of
superiority, in any discussion, which he couldn’t command. She wanted
nothing done and no communication to pass--only a proud unbickering
silence on the part of the Dossons. If the Proberts made a noise and
they made none it would be they who would have the best appearance.
Moreover now, with each elapsing day, she felt she did wish to see
Gaston about it. Her desire was to wait, counting the hours, so that she
might just clearly explain, saying two or three things. Perhaps these
things wouldn’t make it better--very likely they wouldn’t; but at any
rate nothing would have been done in the interval, at least on her part
and her father’s and Delia’s, to make it worse. She told her father that
she wouldn’t, as Delia put it, “want to have him” go round, and was in
some degree relieved at perceiving that he didn’t seem very clear as
to what it was open to him to say to their alienated friends. He wasn’t
afraid but was uncertain. His relation to almost everything that had
happened to them as a family from a good while back was a sense of the
absence of precedents, and precedents were particularly absent now, for
he had never before seen a lot of people in a rage about a piece in the
paper.

Delia also reassured her; she said she’d see to it that poppa didn’t
sneak round. She communicated to her indeed that he hadn’t the smallest
doubt that Gaston, in a few days, would blow them up--all THEM down
there--much higher than they had blown her, and that he was very sorry
he had let her go down herself on that sort of summons. It was for her
and the rest to come to Francie and to him, and if they had anything
practical to say they’d arrive in a body yet. If Mr. Dosson had the
sense of his daughter’s having been roughly handled he derived some of
the consolation of amusement from his persistent humorous view of the
Proberts as a “body.” If they were consistent with their character or
with their complaint they would move en masse upon the hotel, and he
hung about at home a good deal as if to wait for them. Delia intimated
to her sister that this vision cheered them up as they sat, they two, in
the red salon while Francie was in bed. Of course it didn’t exhilarate
this young lady, and she even looked for no brighter side now. She knew
almost nothing but her sharp little ache of suspense, her presentiment
of Gaston’s horror, which grew all the while. Delia remarked to her once
that he would have seen lots of society-papers over there, he would have
become familiar; but this only suggested to the girl--she had at present
strange new moments and impulses of quick reasoning--that they would
only prepare him to be disgusted, not to be indifferent. His disgust
would be colder than anything she had ever known and would complete her
knowledge of him--make her understand him properly for the first time.
She would just meet it as briefly as possible; it would wind up the
business, close the incident, and all would be over.

He didn’t write; that proved it in advance; there had now been two or
three mails without a letter. He had seen the paper in Boston or in New
York and it had simply struck him dumb. It was very well for Delia to
say that of course he didn’t write when he was on the ocean: how could
they get his letters even if he did? There had been time before--before
he sailed; though Delia represented that people never wrote then. They
were ever so much too busy at the last and were going to see their
correspondents in a few days anyway. The only missives that came to
Francie were a copy of the Reverberator, addressed in Mr. Flack’s hand
and with a great inkmark on the margin of the fatal letter, and three
intense pages from Mme. de Brecourt, received forty-eight hours after
the scene at her house. This lady expressed herself as follows:

MY DEAR FRANCIE--I felt very badly after you had gone yesterday morning,
and I had twenty minds to go and see you. But we’ve talked it over
conscientiously and it appears to us that we’ve no right to take any
such step till Gaston arrives. The situation isn’t exclusively ours but
belongs to him as well, and we feel we ought to make it over to him in
as simple and compact a form as possible. Therefore, as we regard it, we
had better not touch it (it’s so delicate, isn’t it, my poor child?) but
leave it just as it is. They think I even exceed my powers in writing
you these simple lines, and that once your participation has been
constatee (which was the only advantage of that dreadful scene)
EVERYTHING should stop. But I’ve liked you, Francie, I’ve believed
in you, and I don’t wish you to be able to say that in spite of
the thunderbolt you’ve drawn down on us I’ve not treated you with
tenderness. It’s a thunderbolt indeed, my poor and innocent but
disastrous little friend! We’re hearing more of it already--the horrible
Republican papers here have (AS WE KNOW) already got hold of the
unspeakable sheet and are preparing to reproduce the article: that
is such parts of it as they may put forward (with innuendoes and
sous-entendus to eke out the rest) without exposing themselves to a suit
for defamation. Poor Leonie de Villepreux has been with us constantly
and Jeanne and her husband have telegraphed that we may expect them
day after to-morrow. They are evidently immensely emotionnes, for
they almost never telegraph. They wish so to receive Gaston. We have
determined all the same to be intensely QUIET, and that will be sure to
be his view. Alphonse and Maxime now recognise that it’s best to leave
Mr. Flack alone, hard as it is to keep one’s hands off him. Have you
anything to lui faire dire--to my precious brother when he arrives? But
it’s foolish of me to ask you that, for you had much better not answer
this. You will no doubt have an opportunity to say to him--whatever, my
dear Francie, you CAN say! It will matter comparatively little that you
may never be able to say it to your friend with every allowance SUZANNE
DE BRECOURT.

Francie looked at this letter and tossed it away without reading it.
Delia picked it up, read it to her father, who didn’t understand it, and
kept it in her possession, poring over it as Mr. Flack had seen her pore
over the cards that were left while she was out or over the registers of
American travellers. They knew of Gaston’s arrival by his telegraphing
from Havre (he came back by the French line) and he mentioned the
hour--“about dinner-time”--at which he should reach Paris. Delia, after
dinner, made her father take her to the circus so that Francie should be
left alone to receive her intended, who would be sure to hurry round
in the course of the evening. The girl herself expressed no preference
whatever on this point, and the idea was one of Delia’s masterly
ones, her flashes of inspiration. There was never any difficulty about
imposing such conceptions on poppa. But at half-past ten, when they
returned, the young man had not appeared, and Francie remained only long
enough to say “I told you so!” with a white face and march off to her
room with her candle. She locked herself in and her sister couldn’t get
at her that night. It was another of Delia’s inspirations not to try,
after she had felt that the door was fast. She forbore, in the exercise
of a great discretion, but she herself for the ensuing hours slept no
wink. Nevertheless the next morning, as early as ten o’clock, she had
the energy to drag her father out to the banker’s and to keep him out
two hours. It would be inconceivable now that Gaston shouldn’t turn up
before dejeuner. He did turn up; about eleven o’clock he came in and
found Francie alone. She noticed, for strangeness, that he was very
pale at the same time that he was sunburnt; also that he didn’t for an
instant smile at her. It was very certain there was no bright flicker
in her own face, and they had the most singular, the most unnatural
meeting. He only said as he arrived: “I couldn’t come last evening;
they made it impossible; they were all there and we were up till three
o’clock this morning.” He looked as if he had been through terrible
things, and it wasn’t simply the strain of his attention to so much
business in America. What passed next she couldn’t remember afterwards;
it seemed but a few seconds before he said to her slowly, holding her
hand--before this he had pressed his lips to hers silently--“Is it
true, Francie, what they say (and they swear to it!) that YOU told that
blackguard those horrors; that that infamous letter’s only a report of
YOUR talk?”

“I told him everything--it’s all me, ME, ME!” the girl replied
exaltedly, without pretending to hesitate an instant as to what he might
mean.

Gaston looked at her with deep eyes, then walked straight away to the
window and remained there in silence. She herself said nothing more. At
last the young man went on: “And I who insisted to them that there was
no natural delicacy like yours!”

“Well, you’ll never need to insist about anything any more!” she cried.
And with this she dashed out of the room by the nearest door. When Delia
and Mr. Dosson returned the red salon was empty and Francie was again
locked in her room. But this time her sister forced an entrance.




XIII

Mr. Dosson, as we know, was, almost more than anything else, loosely
contemplative, and the present occasion could only minister to that side
of his nature, especially as, so far at least as his observation of his
daughters went, it had not urged him into uncontrollable movement.
But the truth is that the intensity, or rather the continuity, of his
meditations did engender an act not perceived by these young ladies,
though its consequences presently became definite enough. While he
waited for the Proberts to arrive in a phalanx and noted that they
failed to do so he had plenty of time to ask himself--and also to ask
Delia--questions about Mr. Flack. So far as they were addressed to his
daughter they were promptly answered, for Delia had been ready from
the first, as we have seen, to pronounce upon the conduct of the
young journalist. Her view of it was clearer every hour; there was a
difference however in the course of action which she judged this view to
demand. At first he was to have been blown up sky-high for the mess
he had got them into--profitless as the process might be and vain the
satisfaction; he was to have been scourged with the sharpest lashes the
sense of violated confidence could inflict. At present he was not to be
touched with a ten-foot pole, but rather cut dead, cast off and ignored,
let alone to his dying day: Delia quickly caught at this for the right
grand way of showing displeasure. Such was the manner in which she
characterised it in her frequent conversations with her father, if that
can be called conversation which consisted of his serenely smoking while
she poured forth arguments that kept repetition abreast of variety.
The same cause will according to application produce effects without
sameness: as a mark of which truth the catastrophe that made Delia
express freely the hope she might never again see so much as the end of
Mr. Flack’s nose had just the opposite action on her parent. The best
balm for his mystification would have been to let his eyes sociably
travel over his young friend’s whole person; this would have been to
deal again with quantities and forces he could measure and in terms he
could understand. If indeed the difference had been pushed further the
girl would have kept the field, for she had the advantage of being able
to motive her attitude, to which Mr. Dosson could have opposed but an
indefensible, in fact an inarticulate, laxity. She had touched on her
deepest conviction in saying to Francie that the correspondent of the
Reverberator had played them that trick on purpose to get them into such
trouble with the Proberts that he might see his own hopes bloom again
in the heat of their disaster. This had many of the appearances of a
strained interpretation, but that didn’t prevent Delia from placing
it before her father several times an hour. It mattered little that he
should remark in return that he didn’t see what good it could do Mr.
Flack that Francie--and he and Delia, for all he could guess--should be
disgusted with him: to Mr. Dosson’s mind that was such a queer way of
reasoning. Delia maintained that she understood perfectly, though
she couldn’t explain--and at any rate she didn’t want the manoeuvring
creature to come flying back from Nice. She didn’t want him to know
there had been a scandal, that they had a grievance against him, that
any one had so much as heard of his article or cared what he published
or didn’t publish; above all she didn’t want him to know that the
Proberts had cooled off. She didn’t want him to dream he could have had
such effects. Mixed up with this high rigour on Miss Dosson’s part was
the oddest secret complacency of reflexion that in consequence of what
Mr. Flack HAD published the great American community was in a position
to know with what fine folks Francie and she were associated. She
hoped that some of the people who used only to call when they were “off
to-morrow” would take the lesson to heart.

While she glowed with this consolation as well as with the resentment
for which it was required her father quietly addressed a few words by
letter to their young friend in the south. This communication was not
of a minatory order; it expressed on the contrary the loose sociability
which was the essence of the good gentleman’s nature. He wanted to see
Mr. Flack, to talk the whole thing over, and the desire to hold him to
an account would play but a small part in the interview. It commended
itself much more to him that the touchiness of the Proberts should be
a sign of a family of cranks--so little did any experience of his own
match it--than that a newspaper-man had misbehaved in trying to turn out
an attractive piece. As the newspaper-man happened to be the person with
whom he had most consorted for some time back he felt drawn to him in
presence of a new problem, and somehow it didn’t seem to Mr. Dosson to
disqualify him as a source of comfort that it was just he who had been
the fountain of injury. The injury wouldn’t be there if the Proberts
didn’t point to it with a thousand ringers. Moreover Mr. Dosson couldn’t
turn his back at such short notice on a man who had smoked so many of
his cigars, ordered so many of his dinners and helped him so handsomely
to spend his money: such acts constituted a bond, and when there was a
bond people gave it a little jerk in time of trouble. His letter to Nice
was the little jerk.

The morning after Francie had passed with such an air from Gaston’s
sight and left him planted in the salon--he had remained ten minutes,
to see if she would reappear, and then had marched out of the hotel--she
received by the first post a letter from him, written the evening
before. It conveyed his deep regret that their meeting that day should
have been of so painful, so unnatural a character, and the hope that she
didn’t consider, as her strange behaviour had seemed to suggest, that
SHE had anything to complain of. There was too much he wanted to say,
and above all too much he wanted to ask, for him to consent to
the indefinite postponement of a necessary interview. There were
explanations, assurances, de part et d’autre, with which it was
manifestly impossible that either of them should dispense. He would
therefore propose that she should see him again, and not be wanting in
patience to that end, late on the morrow. He didn’t propose an earlier
moment because his hands were terribly full at home. Frankly speaking,
the state of things there was of the worst. Jane and her husband had
just arrived and had made him a violent, an unexpected scene. Two of
the French newspapers had got hold of the article and had given the most
perfidious extracts. His father hadn’t stirred out of the house, hadn’t
put his foot inside a club, for more than a week. Marguerite and Maxime
were immediately to start for England on an indefinite absence. They
couldn’t face their life in Paris. For himself he was in the breach,
fighting hard and making, on her behalf, asseverations it was impossible
for him to believe, in spite of the dreadful defiant confession she had
appeared to throw at him in the morning, that she wouldn’t virtually
confirm. He would come in as soon after nine as possible; the day up to
that time would be stiff in the Cours la Reine, and he begged her in the
meantime not to doubt of his perfect tenderness. So far from her having
caused it at all to shrink, he had never yet felt her to have, in his
affection, such a treasure of indulgence to draw upon.

A couple of hours after the receipt of this manifesto Francie lay on one
of the satin sofas with her eyes closed and her hand clinched upon it
in her pocket. Delia sat hard by with a needle in her fingers, certain
morsels of silk and ribbon in her lap, several pins in her mouth, and
her attention turning constantly from her work to her sister’s face. The
weather was now so completely vernal that Mr. Dosson was able to haunt
the court, and he had lately resumed this practice, in which he was
presumably at the present moment absorbed. Delia had lowered her needle
and was making sure if her companion were awake--she had been perfectly
still for so long--when her glance was drawn to the door, which she
heard pushed open. Mr. Flack stood there, looking from one to the other
of the young ladies as to see which would be most agreeably surprised by
his visit.

“I saw your father downstairs--he says it’s all right,” said the
journalist, advancing with a brave grin. “He told me to come straight
up--I had quite a talk with him.”

“All right--ALL RIGHT?” Delia Dosson repeated, springing up. “Yes
indeed--I should say so!” Then she checked herself, asking in another
manner: “Is that so? poppa sent you up?” And then in still another:
“Well, have you had a good time at Nice?”

“You’d better all come right down and see. It’s lovely down there. If
you’ll come down I’ll go right back. I guess you want a change,” Mr.
Flack went on. He spoke to Delia but he looked at Francie, who showed
she had not been asleep by the quick consciousness with which she raised
herself on her sofa. She gazed at the visitor with parted lips,
but uttered no word. He barely faltered, coming toward her with his
conscious grimace and his hand out. His knowing eyes were more knowing
than ever, but had an odd appearance of being smaller, like penetrating
points. “Your father has told me all about it. Did you ever hear of
anything so cheap?”

“All about what?--all about what?” said Delia, whose attempt to
represent happy ignorance was menaced by an intromission of ferocity.
She might succeed in appearing ignorant, but could scarcely succeed in
appearing kind. Francie had risen to her feet and had suffered Mr. Flack
to possess himself for a moment of her hand, but neither of them had
asked the young man to sit down. “I thought you were going to stay a
month at Nice?” Delia continued.

“Well, I was, but your father’s letter started me up.”

“Father’s letter?”

“He wrote me about the row--didn’t you know it? Then I broke. You didn’t
suppose I was going to stay down there when there were such times up
here.”

“Gracious!” Delia panted.

“Is it pleasant at Nice? Is it very gay? Isn’t it very hot now?” Francie
rather limply asked.

“Oh it’s all right. But I haven’t come up here to crow about Nice, have
I?”

“Why not, if we want you to?”--Delia spoke up.

Mr. Flack looked at her for a moment very hard, in the whites of the
eyes; then he replied, turning back to her sister: “Anything YOU like,
Miss Francie. With you one subject’s as good as another. Can’t we sit
down? Can’t we be comfortable?” he added.

“Comfortable? of course we can!” cried Delia, but she remained erect
while Francie sank upon the sofa again and their companion took
possession of the nearest chair.

“Do you remember what I told you once, that the people WILL have the
plums?” George Flack asked with a hard buoyancy of the younger girl.

She looked an instant as if she were trying to recollect what he had
told her; and then said, more remotely, “DID father write to you?”

“Of course he did. That’s why I’m here.”

“Poor father, sometimes he doesn’t know WHAT to do!” Delia threw in with
violence.

“He told me the Reverberator has raised a breeze. I guessed that for
myself when I saw the way the papers here were after it. That thing will
go the rounds, you’ll see. What brought me was learning from him that
they HAVE got their backs up.”

“What on earth are you talking about?” Delia Dosson rang out.

Mr. Flack turned his eyes on her own as he had done a moment before;
Francie sat there serious, looking hard at the carpet. “What game are
you trying, Miss Delia? It ain’t true YOU care what I wrote, is it?” he
pursued, addressing himself again to Francie.

After a moment she raised her eyes. “Did you write it yourself?”

“What do you care what he wrote--or what does any one care?” Delia again
interposed.

“It has done the paper more good than anything--every one’s so
interested,” said Mr. Flack in the tone of reasonable explanation. “And
you don’t feel you’ve anything to complain of, do you?” he added to
Francie kindly.

“Do you mean because I told you?”

“Why certainly. Didn’t it all spring out of that lovely drive and that
walk up in the Bois we had--when you took me up to see your portrait?
Didn’t you understand that I wanted you to know that the public would
appreciate a column or two about Mr. Waterlow’s new picture, and about
you as the subject of it, and about your being engaged to a member of
the grand old monde, and about what was going on in the grand old monde,
which would naturally attract attention through that? Why Miss Francie,”
 Mr. Flack ever so blandly pursued, “you regularly TALKED as if you did.”

“Did I talk a great deal?” asked Francie.

“Why most freely--it was too lovely. We had a real grand old jaw. Don’t
you remember when we sat there in the Bois?”

“Oh rubbish!” Delia panted.

“Yes, and Mme. de Cliche passed.”

“And you told me she was scandalised. And we had to laugh,” he reminded
her--“it struck us as so idiotic. I said it was a high old POSE, and
I knew what to think of it. Your father tells me she’s scandalised
now--she and all the rest of them--at the sight of their names at last
in a REAL newspaper. Well now, if you want to know, it’s a bigger
pose than ever, and, as I said just now, it’s too damned cheap. It’s
THIN--that’s what it is; and if it were genuine it wouldn’t count. They
pretend to be shocked because it looks exclusive, but in point of fact
they like it first-rate.”

“Are you talking about that old piece in the paper? Mercy, wasn’t that
dead and buried days and days ago?” Delia quavered afresh. She hovered
there in dismay as well as in displeasure, upset by the news that her
father had summoned Mr. Flack to Paris, which struck her almost as
a treachery, since it seemed to denote a plan. A plan, and an
uncommunicated plan, on Mr. Dosson’s part was unnatural and alarming;
and there was further provocation in his appearing to shirk the
responsibility of it by not having come up at such a moment with his
accomplice. Delia was impatient to know what he wanted anyway. Did
he want to drag them down again to such commonness--ah she felt the
commonness now!--even though it COULD hustle? Did he want to put Mr.
Flack forward, with a feeble flourish that didn’t answer one of their
questions, as a substitute for the alienated Gaston? If she hadn’t been
afraid that something still more uncanny than anything that had happened
yet might come to pass between her two companions in case of her leaving
them together she would have darted down to the court to appease her
conjectures, to challenge her father and tell him how particularly
pleased she should be if he wouldn’t put in his oar. She felt liberated,
however, the next moment, for something occurred that struck her as a
sure proof of the state of her sister’s spirit.

“Do you know the view I take of the matter, according to what your
father has told me?” Mr. Flack enquired. “I don’t mean it was he gave me
the tip; I guess I’ve seen enough over here by this time to have worked
it out. They’re scandalised all right--they’re blue with horror and have
never heard of anything so dreadful. Miss Francie,” her visitor roared,
“that ain’t good enough for you and me. They know what’s in the papers
every day of their lives and they know how it got there. They ain’t like
the fellow in the story--who was he?--who couldn’t think how the
apples got into the dumplings. They’re just grabbing a pretext to break
because--because, well, they don’t think you’re blue blood. They’re
delighted to strike a pretext they can work, and they’re all cackling
over the egg it has taken so many hens of ‘em to lay. That’s MY
diagnosis if you want to know.”

“Oh--how can you say such a thing?” Francie returned with a tremor
in her voice that struck her sister. Her eyes met Delia’s at the same
moment, and this young woman’s heart bounded with the sense that she was
safe. Mr. Flack’s power to hustle presumed too far--though Mr. Dosson
had crude notions about the licence of the press she felt, even as an
untutored woman, what a false step he was now taking--and it seemed to
her that Francie, who was not impressed (the particular light in her
eyes now showed it) could be trusted to allow him no benefit.

“What does it matter what he says, my dear?” she interposed. “Do make
him drop the subject--he’s talking very wild. I’m going down to see what
poppa means--I never heard of anything so flat!” At the door she paused
a moment to add mutely, by mere facial force: “Now just wipe him out,
mind!” It was the same injunction she had launched at her from afar that
day, a year before, when they all dined at Saint-Germain, and she could
remember how effective it had then been. The next moment she flirted
out.

As soon as she had gone Mr. Flack moved nearer to Francie. “Now look
here, you’re not going back on me, are you?”

“Going back on you--what do you mean?”

“Ain’t we together in this thing? WHY sure! We’re CLOSE together, Miss
Francie!”

“Together--together?” Francie repeated with charming wan but not at all
tender eyes on him.

“Don’t you remember what I said to you--just as straight as my course
always is--before we went up there, before our lovely drive? I stated
to you that I felt--that I always feel--my great hearty hungry public
behind me.”

“Oh yes, I understood--it was all for you to work it up. I told them so.
I never denied it,” Francie brought forth.

“You told them so?”

“When they were all crying and going on. I told them I knew it--I told
them I gave you the tip as you call it.”

She felt Mr. Flack fix her all alarmingly as she spoke these words;
then he was still nearer to her--he had taken her hand. “Ah you’re too
sweet!” She disengaged her hand and in the effort she sprang up; but
he, rising too, seemed to press always nearer--she had a sense (it was
disagreeable) that he was demonstrative--so that she retreated a little
before him. “They were all there roaring and raging, trying to make you
believe you had outraged them?”

“All but young Mr. Probert. Certainly they don’t like it,” she said at
her distance.

“The cowards!” George Flack after a moment remarked. “And where was
young Mr. Probert?” he then demanded.

“He was away--I’ve told you--in America.”

“Ah yes, your father told me. But now he’s back doesn’t he like it
either?”

“I don’t know, Mr. Flack,” Francie answered with impatience.

“Well I do then. He’s a coward too--he’ll do what his poppa tells him,
and the countess and the duchess and his French brothers-in-law from
whom he takes lessons: he’ll just back down, he’ll give you up.”

“I can’t talk with you about that,” said Francie.

“Why not? why is he such a sacred subject, when we ARE together?
You can’t alter that,” her visitor insisted. “It was too lovely your
standing up for me--your not denying me!”

“You put in things I never said. It seems to me it was very different,”
 she freely contended.

“Everything IS different when it’s printed. What else would be the
good of the papers? Besides, it wasn’t I; it was a lady who helps me
here--you’ve heard me speak of her: Miss Topping. She wants so much to
know you--she wants to talk with you.”

“And will she publish THAT?” Francie asked with unstudied effect.

Mr. Flack stared a moment. “Lord, how they’ve worked on you! And do YOU
think it’s bad?”

“Do I think what’s bad?”

“Why the letter we’re talking about.”

“Well--I didn’t see the point of so much.”

He waited a little, interestedly. “Do you think I took any advantage?”

She made no answer at first, but after a moment said in a tone he had
never heard from her: “Why do you come here this way? Why do you ask me
such questions?”

He hesitated; after which he broke out: “Because I love you. Don’t you
know that?”

“Oh PLEASE don’t!” she almost moaned, turning away.

But he was launched now and he let himself go. “Why won’t you understand
it--why won’t you understand the rest? Don’t you see how it has worked
round--the heartless brutes they’ve turned into, and the way OUR life,
yours and mine, is bound to be the same? Don’t you see the damned
sneaking scorn with which they treat you and that _I_ only want to do
anything in the world for you?”

Francie’s white face, very quiet now, let all this pass without a sign
of satisfaction. Her only response was presently to say: “Why did you
ask me so many questions that day?”

“Because I always ask questions--it’s my nature and my business to ask
them. Haven’t you always seen me ask you and ask every one all I could?
Don’t you know they’re the very foundation of my work? I thought you
sympathised with my work so much--you used to tell me you did.”

“Well, I did,” she allowed.

“You put it in the dead past, I see. You don’t then any more?”

If this remark was on her visitor’s part the sign of a rare assurance
the girl’s cold mildness was still unruffled by it. She considered, she
even smiled; then she replied: “Oh yes I do--only not so much.”

“They HAVE worked on you; but I should have thought they’d have
disgusted you. I don’t care--even a little sympathy will do: whatever
you’ve got left.” He paused, looking at her, but it was a speech she had
nothing for; so he went on: “There was no obligation for you to answer
my questions--you might have shut me up that day with a word.”

“Really?” she asked with all her grave good faith in her face. “I
thought I HAD to--for fear I should appear ungrateful.”

“Ungrateful?”

“Why to you--after what you had done. Don’t you remember that it was you
who introduced us--?” And she paused with a fatigued delicacy.

“Not to those snobs who are screaming like frightened peacocks. I beg
your pardon--I haven’t THAT on my conscience!” Mr. Flack quite grandly
declared.

“Well, you introduced us to Mr. Waterlow and he introduced us to--to
his friends,” she explained, colouring, as if it were a fault for the
inexactness caused by her magnanimity. “That’s why I thought I ought to
tell you what you’d like.”

“Why, do you suppose if I’d known where that first visit of ours to
Waterlow was going to bring you out I’d have taken you within fifty
miles--?” He stopped suddenly; then in another tone: “Jerusalem, there’s
no one like you! And you told them it was all YOU?”

“Never mind what I told them.”

“Miss Francie,” said George Flack, “if you’ll marry me I’ll never ask a
question again. I’ll go into some other business.”

“Then you didn’t do it on purpose?” Francie asked.

“On purpose?”

“To get me into a quarrel with them--so that I might be free again.”

“Well, of all the blamed ideas--!” the young man gasped. “YOUR pure mind
never gave birth to that--it was your sister’s.”

“Wasn’t it natural it should occur to me, since if, as you say, you’d
never consciously have been the means--”

“Ah but I WAS the means!” Mr. Flack interrupted. “We must go, after all,
by what DID happen.”

“Well, I thanked you when I drove with you and let you draw me out.
So we’re square, aren’t we?” The term Francie used was a colloquialism
generally associated with levity, but her face, as she spoke, was none
the less deeply serious--serious even to pain.

“We’re square?” he repeated.

“I don’t think you ought to ask for anything more. Good-bye.”

“Good-bye? Never!” cried George Flack, who flushed with his defeat to a
degree that spoke strangely of his hopes.

Something in the way she repeated her “Goodbye!” betrayed her impression
of this, and not a little withal that so much confidence left her
unflattered. “Do go away!” she broke out.

“Well, I’ll come back very soon”--and he took up his hat.

“Please don’t--I don’t like it.” She had now contrived to put a wide
space between them.

“Oh you tormentress!” he groaned. He went toward the door, but before he
reached it turned round.

“Will you tell me this anyway? ARE you going to marry the lot--after
this?”

“Do you want to put that in the paper?”

“Of course I do--and say you said it!” Mr. Flack held up his head.

They stood looking at each other across the large room. “Well then--I
ain’t. There!”

“That’s all right,” he said as he went out.




XIV

When Gaston Probert came that evening he was received by Dosson and
Delia, and when he asked where Francie might be was told by the latter
that she would show herself in half an hour. Francie had instructed her
sister that as their friend would have, first of all, information to
give their father about the business he had transacted in America he
wouldn’t care for a lot of women in the room. When Delia reported this
speech to Mr. Dosson that gentleman protested that he wasn’t in any
hurry for the business; what he wanted to find out most was whether
Mr. Probert had a good time--whether he had liked it over there. Gaston
might have liked it, but he didn’t look as if he had had a very good
time. His face told of reverses, of suffering; and Delia declared to him
that if she hadn’t received his assurance to the contrary she would have
believed he was right down sick. He allowed that he had been very sick
at sea and was still feeling the effect of it, but insisted that there
was nothing the matter with him now. He sat for some time with Mr.
Dosson and Delia, and never once alluded to the cloud that hung over
their relations. The girl had schooled her father to a waiting attitude
on this point, and the manner in which she had descended on him in
the morning, after Mr. Flack had come upstairs, was a lesson he wasn’t
likely soon to forget. It had been impressed on him that she was indeed
wiser than he could pretend to be, and he was now mindful that he
mustn’t speak of the “piece in the paper” unless young Probert should
speak of it first. When Delia rushed down to him in the court she began
by asking him categorically whom he had wished to do good to by sending
Mr. Flack up to their parlour. To Francie or to her? Why the way they
felt then, they detested his very name. To Mr. Flack himself? Why he had
simply exposed him to the biggest snub he had ever got in his life.

“Well, hanged if I understand!” poor Mr. Dosson had said. “I thought you
liked the piece--you think it’s so queer THEY don’t like it.” “They,” in
the parlance of the Dossons, now never meant anything but the Proberts
in congress assembled.

“I don’t think anything’s queer but you!” Delia had retorted; and she
had let her father know that she had left Francie in the very act of
“handling” Mr. Flack.

“Is that so?” the old gentleman had quavered in an impotence that made
him wince with a sense of meanness--meanness to his bold initiator of so
many Parisian hours.

Francie’s visitor came down a few minutes later and passed through the
court and out of the hotel without looking at them. Mr. Dosson had been
going to call after him, but Delia checked him with a violent pinch.
The unsociable manner of the young journalist’s departure deepened Mr.
Dosson’s dull ache over the mystery of things. I think this may be said
to have been the only incident in the whole business that gave him a
personal pang. He remembered how many of his cigars he had smoked
with Mr. Flack and how universal a participant he had made him. This
haughtiness struck him as the failure of friendship--not the publication
of details about the Proberts. Interwoven with Mr. Dosson’s nature
was the view that if these people had done bad things they ought to be
ashamed of themselves and he couldn’t pity them, and that if they hadn’t
done them there was no need of making such a rumpus about other people’s
knowing. It was therefore, in spite of the young man’s rough exit, still
in the tone of American condonation that he had observed to Delia: “He
says that’s what they like over there and that it stands to reason that
if you start a paper you’ve got to give them what they like. If you want
the people with you, you’ve got to be with the people.”

“Well, there are a good many people in the world. I don’t think the
Proberts are with us much.”

“Oh he doesn’t mean them,” said Mr. Dosson.

“Well, I do!” cried Delia.

At one of the ormolu tables, near a lamp with a pink shade, Gaston
insisted on making at least a partial statement. He didn’t say that he
might never have another chance, but Delia felt with despair that this
idea was in his mind. He was very gentle, very polite, but distinctly
cold, she thought; he was intensely depressed and for half an hour
uttered not the least little pleasantry. There was no particular
occasion for that when he talked about “preferred bonds” with her
father. This was a language Delia couldn’t translate, though she had
heard it from childhood. He had a great many papers to show Mr. Dosson,
records of the mission of which he had acquitted himself, but Mr. Dosson
pushed them into the drawer of the ormolu table with the remark that he
guessed they were all right. Now, after the fact, he appeared to attach
but little importance to Gaston’s achievements--an attitude which
Delia perceived to be slightly disconcerting to their visitor. Delia
understood it: she had an instinctive sense that her father knew a
great deal more than Gaston could tell him even about the work he had
committed to him, and also that there was in such punctual settlements
an eagerness, a literalism, totally foreign to Mr. Dosson’s domestic
habits and to which he would even have imputed a certain pettifogging
provinciality--treatable however with dry humour. If Gaston had cooled
off he wanted at least to be able to say that he had rendered them
services in America; but now her father, for the moment at least,
scarcely appeared to think his services worth speaking of: an incident
that left him with more of the responsibility for his cooling. What
Mr. Dosson wanted to know was how everything had struck him over there,
especially the Pickett Building and the parlour-cars and Niagara and the
hotels he had instructed him to go to, giving him an introduction in
two or three cases to the gentleman in charge of the office. It was in
relation to these themes that Gaston was guilty of a want of spring, as
the girl phrased it to herself; that he could produce no appreciative
expression. He declared however, repeatedly, that it was a most
extraordinary country--most extraordinary and far beyond anything he had
had any conception of. “Of course I didn’t like EVERYTHING,” he said,
“any more than I like everything anywhere.”

“Well, what didn’t you like?” Mr. Dosson enquired, at this, after a
short silence.

Gaston Probert made his choice. “Well, the light for instance.”

“The light--the electric?”

“No, the solar! I thought it rather hard, too much like the scratching
of a slate-pencil.” As Mr. Dosson hereupon looked vague and rather as if
the reference were to some enterprise (a great lamp company) of which he
had not heard--conveying a suggestion that he was perhaps staying away
too long, Gaston immediately added: “I really think Francie might come
in. I wrote to her that I wanted particularly to see her.”

“I’ll go and call her--I’ll make her come,” said Delia at the door. She
left her companions together and Gaston returned to the subject of Mr.
Munster, Mr. Dosson’s former partner, to whom he had taken a letter
and who had shown him every sort of civility. Mr. Dosson was pleased at
this; nevertheless he broke out suddenly:

“Look here, you know; if you’ve got anything to say that you don’t think
very acceptable you had better say it to ME.” Gaston changed colour, but
his reply was checked by Delia’s quick return. She brought the news
that her sister would be obliged if he would go into the little
dining-room--he would find her there. She had something for his ear that
she could mention only in private. It was very comfortable; there was
a lamp and a fire. “Well, I guess she CAN take care of herself!” Mr.
Dosson, at this, commented with a laugh. “What does she want to say to
him?” he asked when Gaston had passed out.

“Gracious knows! She won’t tell me. But it’s too flat, at his age, to
live in such terror.”

“In such terror?”

“Why of your father. You’ve got to choose.”

“How, to choose?”

“Why if there’s a person you like and he doesn’t like.”

“You mean you can’t choose your father,” said Mr. Dosson thoughtfully.

“Of course you can’t.”

“Well then please don’t like any one. But perhaps _I_ should like him,”
 he added, faithful to his easier philosophy.

“I guess you’d have to,” said Delia.

In the small salle-a-manger, when Gaston went in, Francie was standing
by the empty table, and as soon as she saw him she began.

“You can’t say I didn’t tell you I should do something. I did nothing
else from the first--I mean but tell you. So you were warned again and
again. You knew what to expect.”

“Ah don’t say THAT again; if you knew how it acts on my nerves!” the
young man groaned. “You speak as if you had done it on purpose--to carry
out your absurd threat.”

“Well, what does it matter when it’s all over?”

“It’s not all over. Would to God it were!”

The girl stared. “Don’t you know what I sent for you to come in here
for? To bid you good-bye.”

He held her an instant as if in unbelievable view, and then “Francie,
what on earth has got into you?” he broke out. “What deviltry, what
poison?” It would have been strange and sad to an observer, the
opposition of these young figures, so fresh, so candid, so meant for
confidence, but now standing apart and looking at each other in a wan
defiance that hardened their faces.

“Don’t they despise me--don’t they hate me? You do yourself! Certainly
you’ll be glad for me to break off and spare you decisions and troubles
impossible to you.”

“I don’t understand; it’s like some hideous dream!” Gaston Probert
cried. “You act as if you were doing something for a wager, and you make
it worse by your talk. I don’t believe it--I don’t believe a word of
it.”

“What don’t you believe?” she asked.

“That you told him--that you told him knowingly. If you’ll take that
back (it’s too monstrous!) if you’ll deny it and give me your assurance
that you were practised upon and surprised, everything can still be
arranged.”

“Do you want me to lie?” asked Francie Dosson. “I thought you’d like
pleasant words.”

“Oh Francie, Francie!” moaned the wretched youth with tears in his eyes.

“What can be arranged? What do you mean by everything?” she went on.

“Why they’ll accept it; they’ll ask for nothing more. It’s your
participation they can’t forgive.”

“THEY can’t? Why do you talk to me of ‘them’? I’m not engaged to
‘them’!” she said with a shrill little laugh.

“Oh Francie _I_ am! And it’s they who are buried beneath that filthy
rubbish!”

She flushed at this characterisation of Mr. Flack’s epistle, but
returned as with more gravity: “I’m very sorry--very sorry indeed. But
evidently I’m not delicate.”

He looked at her, helpless and bitter. “It’s not the newspapers in your
country that would have made you so. Lord, they’re too incredible! And
the ladies have them on their tables.”

“You told me we couldn’t here--that the Paris ones are too bad,” said
Francie.

“Bad they are, God knows; but they’ve never published anything like
that--poured forth such a flood of impudence on decent quiet people who
only want to be left alone.”

Francie sank to a chair by the table as if she were too tired to stand
longer, and with her arms spread out on the lamplit plush she looked up
at him. “Was it there you saw it?”

He was on his feet opposite, and she made at this moment the odd
reflexion that she had never “realised” he had such fine lovely uplifted
eyebrows. “Yes, a few days before I sailed. I hated them from the moment
I got there--I looked at them very little. But that was a chance. I
opened the paper in the hall of an hotel--there was a big marble floor
and spittoons!--and my eyes fell on that horror. It made me ill.”

“Did you think it was me?” she patiently gaped.

“About as soon as I supposed it was my father. But I was too mystified,
too tormented.”

“Then why didn’t you write to me, if you didn’t think it was me?”

“Write to you? I wrote to you every three days,” he cried.

“Not after that.”

“Well, I may have omitted a post at the last--I thought it might be
Delia,” Gaston added in a moment.

“Oh she didn’t want me to do it--the day I went with him, the day I told
him. She tried to prevent me,” Francie insisted.

“Would to God then she had!” he wailed.

“Haven’t you told them she’s delicate too?” she asked in her strange
tone.

He made no answer to this; he only continued: “What power, in heaven’s
name, has he got over you? What spell has he worked?”

“He’s a gay old friend--he helped us ever so much when we were first in
Paris.”

“But, my dearest child, what ‘gaieties,’ what friends--what a man to
know!”

“If we hadn’t known him we shouldn’t have known YOU. Remember it was Mr.
Flack who brought us that day to Mr. Waterlow’s.”

“Oh you’d have come some other way,” said Gaston, who made nothing of
that.

“Not in the least. We knew nothing about any other way. He helped us in
everything--he showed us everything. That was why I told him--when he
asked me. I liked him for what he had done.”

Gaston, who had now also seated himself, listened to this attentively.
“I see. It was a kind of delicacy.”

“Oh a ‘kind’!” She desperately smiled.

He remained a little with his eyes on her face. “Was it for me?”

“Of course it was for you.”

“Ah how strange you are!” he cried with tenderness. “Such
contradictions--on s’y perd. I wish you’d say that to THEM, that way.
Everything would be right.”

“Never, never!” said the girl. “I’ve wronged them, and nothing will ever
be the same again. It was fatal. If I felt as they do I too would loathe
the person who should have done such a thing. It doesn’t seem to me
so bad--the thing in the paper; but you know best. You must go back to
them. You know best,” she repeated.

“They were the last, the last people in France, to do it to. The
sense of desecration, of pollution, you see”--he explained as if for
conscience.

“Oh you needn’t tell me--I saw them all there!” she answered.

“It must have been a dreadful scene. But you DIDN’T brave them, did
you?”

“Brave them--what are you talking about? To you that idea’s incredible!”
 she then hopelessly sighed.

But he wouldn’t have this. “No, no--I can imagine cases.” He clearly had
SOME vision of independence, though he looked awful about it.

“But this isn’t a case, hey?” she demanded. “Well then go back to
them--go back,” she repeated. At this he half-threw himself across the
table to seize her hands, but she drew away and, as he came nearer,
pushed her chair back, springing up. “You know you didn’t come here to
tell me you’re ready to give them up.”

“To give them up?” He only echoed it with all his woe at first. “I’ve
been battling with them till I’m ready to drop. You don’t know how they
feel--how they MUST feel.”

“Oh yes I do. All this has made me older, every hour.”

“It has made you--so extraordinarily!--more beautiful,” said Gaston
Probert.

“I don’t care. Nothing will induce me to consent to any sacrifice.”

“Some sacrifice there must be. Give me time--give me time, I’ll manage
it. I only wish they hadn’t seen you there in the Bois.”

“In the Bois?”

“That Marguerite hadn’t seen you--with that lying blackguard. That’s the
image they can’t get over.”

Well, it was as if it had been the thing she had got herself most
prepared for--so that she must speak accordingly. “I see you can’t
either, Gaston. Anyhow I WAS there and I felt it all right. That’s all I
can say. You must take me as I am,” said Francie Dosson.

“Don’t--don’t; you infuriate me!” he pleaded, frowning.

She had seemed to soften, but she was in a sudden flame again. “Of
course I do, and I shall do it again. We’re too terribly different.
Everything makes you so. You CAN’T give them up--ever, ever.
Good-bye--good-bye! That’s all I wanted to tell you.”

“I’ll go and throttle him!” the young man almost howled.

“Very well, go! Good-bye.” She had stepped quickly to the door and had
already opened it, vanishing as she had done the other time.

“Francie, Francie!” he supplicated, following her into the passage. The
door was not the one that led to the salon; it communicated with the
other apartments. The girl had plunged into these--he already heard her
push a sharp bolt. Presently he went away without taking leave of Mr.
Dosson and Delia.

“Why he acts just like Mr. Flack,” said the old man when they discovered
that the interview in the dining-room had come to an end.

The next day was a bad one for Charles Waterlow, his work in the Avenue
de Villiers being terribly interrupted. Gaston Probert invited himself
to breakfast at noon and remained till the time at which the artist
usually went out--an extravagance partly justified by the previous
separation of several weeks. During these three or four hours Gaston
walked up and down the studio while Waterlow either sat or stood before
his easel. He put his host vastly out and acted on his nerves, but this
easy genius was patient with him by reason of much pity, feeling the
occasion indeed more of a crisis in the history of the troubled youth
than the settlement of one question would make it. Waterlow’s compassion
was slightly tinged with contempt, for there was being settled above
all, it seemed to him, and, alas, in the wrong sense, the question of
his poor friend’s character. Gaston was in a fever; he broke out into
passionate pleas--he relapsed into gloomy silences. He roamed about
continually, his hands in his pockets and his hair in a tangle; he could
take neither a decision nor a momentary rest. It struck his companion
more than ever before that he was after all essentially a foreigner;
he had the foreign sensibility, the sentimental candour, the need for
sympathy, the communicative despair. A true young Anglo-Saxon would have
buttoned himself up in his embarrassment and been dry and awkward and
capable, and, however conscious of a pressure, unconscious of a
drama; whereas Gaston was effusive and appealing and ridiculous and
graceful--natural above all and egotistical. Indeed a true young
Anglo-Saxon wouldn’t have known the particular acuteness of such a
quandary, for he wouldn’t have parted to such an extent with his freedom
of spirit. It was the fact of this surrender on his visitor’s part that
excited Waterlow’s secret scorn: family feeling was all very well, but
to see it triumph as a superstition calling for the blood-sacrifice made
him feel he would as soon be a blackamoor on his knees before a fetish.
He now measured for the first time the root it had taken in Gaston’s
nature. To act like a man the hope of the Proberts must pull up the
root, even if the operation should be terribly painful, should be
attended with cries and tears and contortions, with baffling scruples
and a sense of sacrilege, the sense of siding with strangers against his
own flesh and blood. Now and again he broke out: “And if you should see
her as she looks just now--she’s too lovely, too touching!--you’d see
how right I was originally, when I found her such a revelation of that
rare type, the French Renaissance, you know, the one we talked about.”
 But he reverted with at least equal frequency to the oppression he
seemed unable to throw off, the idea of something done of cruel purpose
and malice, with a refinement of outrage: such an accident to THEM, of
all people on earth, the very last, the least thinkable, those who, he
verily believed, would feel it more than any family in the world. When
Waterlow asked what made them of so exceptionally fine a fibre he could
only answer that they just happened to be--not enviably, if one would;
it was his father’s influence and example, his very genius, the worship
of privacy and good manners, a hatred of all the new familiarities and
profanations. The artist sought to know further, at last and rather
wearily, what in two words was the practical question his friend desired
he should consider. Whether he should be justified in throwing the girl
over--was that the issue?

“Gracious goodness, no! For what sort of sneak do you take me? She made
a mistake, but any innocent young creature might do that. It’s whether
it strikes you I should be justified in throwing THEM over.”

“It depends upon the sense you attach to justification.”

“I mean should I be miserably unhappy? Would it be in their power to
make me so?”

“To try--certainly, if they’re capable of anything so nasty. The only
fair play for them is to let you alone,” Waterlow wound up.

“Ah, they won’t do that--they like me too much!” Gaston ingenuously
cried.

“It’s an odd way of liking! The best way to show their love will be to
let you marry where your affections, and so many other charming things,
are involved.”

“Certainly--only they question the charming things. They feel she
represents, poor little dear, such dangers, such vulgarities, such
possibilities of doing other dreadful things, that it’s upon THEM--I
mean on those things--my happiness would be shattered.”

“Well,” the elder man rather dryly said, “if you yourself have no
secrets for persuading them of the contrary I’m afraid I can’t teach you
one.”

“Yes, I ought to do it myself,” Gaston allowed in the candour of his
meditations. Then he went on in his torment of hesitation: “They never
believed in her from the first. My father was perfectly definite about
it. At heart they never accepted her; they only pretended to do so
because I guaranteed her INSTINCTS--that’s what I did, heaven help me!
and that she was incapable of doing a thing that could ever displease
them. Then no sooner was my back turned than she perpetrated that!”

“That was your folly,” Waterlow remarked, painting away.

“My folly--to turn my back?”

“No, no--to guarantee.”

“My dear fellow, wouldn’t you?”--and Gaston stared.

“Never in the world.”

“You’d have thought her capable--?”

“Capabilissima! And I shouldn’t have cared.”

“Do you think her then capable of breaking out again in some new way
that’s as bad?”

“I shouldn’t care if she was. That’s the least of all questions.”

“The least?”

“Ah don’t you see, wretched youth,” cried the artist, pausing from
his work and looking up--“don’t you see that the question of her
possibilities is as nothing compared to that of yours? She’s the
sweetest young thing I ever saw; but even if she happened not to be I
should still urge you to marry her, in simple self-preservation.”

Gaston kept echoing. “In self-preservation?”

“To save from destruction the last scrap of your independence. That’s a
much more important matter even than not treating her shabbily. They’re
doing their best to kill you morally--to render you incapable of
individual life.”

Gaston was immensely struck. “They are--they are!” he declared with
enthusiasm.

“Well then, if you believe it, for heaven’s sake go and marry her
to-morrow!” Waterlow threw down his implements and added: “And come out
of this--into the air.”

Gaston, however, was planted in his path on the way to the door. “And if
she goes again and does the very same?”

“The very same--?” Waterlow thought.

“I mean something else as barbarous and as hard to bear.”

“Well,” said Waterlow, “you’ll at least have got rid of your family.”

“Yes, if she lets me in again I shall be glad they’re not there! They’re
right, pourtant, they’re right,” Gaston went on, passing out of the
studio with his friend.

“They’re right?”

“It was unimaginable that she should.”

“Yes, thank heaven! It was the finger of providence--providence taking
you off your guard to give you your chance.” This was ingenious, but,
though he could glow for a moment in response to it, Francie’s lover--if
lover he may in his so infirm aspect be called--looked as if he
mistrusted it, thought it slightly sophistical. What really shook him
however was his companion’s saying to him in the vestibule, when they
had taken their hats and sticks and were on the point of going out:
“Lord, man, how can you be so impenetrably dense? Don’t you see that
she’s really of the softest finest material that breathes, that she’s
a perfect flower of plasticity, that everything you may have an
apprehension about will drop away from her like the dead leaves from a
rose and that you may make of her any perfect and enchanting thing you
yourself have the wit to conceive?”

“Ah my dear friend!”--and poor Gaston, with another of his revulsions,
panted for gratitude.

“The limit will be yours, not hers,” Waterlow added.

“No, no, I’ve done with limits,” his friend ecstatically cried.

That evening at ten o’clock Gaston presented himself at the Hotel de
l’Univers et de Cheltenham and requested the German waiter to introduce
him into the dining-room attached to Mr. Dosson’s apartments and then go
and tell Miss Francina he awaited her there.

“Oh you’ll be better there than in the zalon--they’ve villed it with
their luccatch,” said the man, who always addressed him in an intention
of English and wasn’t ignorant of the tie that united the visitor to
the amiable American family, or perhaps even of the modifications it had
lately undergone.

“With their luggage?”

“They leave to-morrow morning--ach I don’t think they themselves know
for where, sir.”

“Please then say to Miss Francina that I’ve called on the most urgent
business and am extraordinarily pressed.”

The special ardour possessing Gaston at that moment belonged to the
order of the communicative, but perhaps the vividness with which the
waiter placed this exhibition of it before the young lady is better
explained by the fact that her lover slipped a five-franc piece into his
hand. She at any rate entered his place of patience sooner than Gaston
had ventured to hope, though she corrected her promptitude a little by
stopping short and drawing back when she saw how pale he was and how he
looked as if he had been crying.

“I’ve chosen--I’ve chosen,” he said expressively, smiling at her in
denial of these indications.

“You’ve chosen?”

“I’ve had to give them up. But I like it so better than having to give
YOU up! I took you first with their assent. That was well enough--it was
worth trying for. But now I take you without it. We can live that way
too.”

“Ah I’m not worth it. You give up too much!” Francie returned. “We’re
going away--it’s all over.” She averted herself quickly, as if to carry
out her meaning, but he caught her more quickly still and held her--held
her fast and long. She had only freed herself when her father and sister
broke in from the salon, attracted apparently by the audible commotion.

“Oh I thought you had at least knocked over the lamp!” Delia exclaimed.

“You must take me with you if you’re going away, Mr. Dosson,” Gaston
said. “I’ll start whenever you like.”

“All right--where shall we go?” that amiable man asked.

“Hadn’t you decided that?”

“Well, the girls said they’d tell me.”

“We were going home,” Francie brought out.

“No we weren’t--not a wee mite!” Delia professed.

“Oh not THERE” Gaston murmured, with a look of anguish at Francie.

“Well, when you’ve fixed it you can take the tickets,” Mr. Dosson
observed with detachment.

“To some place where there are no newspapers, darling,” Gaston went on.

“I guess you’ll have hard work to find one,” Mr. Dosson pursued.

“Dear me, we needn’t read them any more. We wouldn’t have read that
one if your family hadn’t forced us,” Delia said to her prospective
brother-in-law.

“Well, I shall never be forced--I shall never again in my life look at
one,” he very gravely declared.

“You’ll see, sir,--you’ll have to!” Mr. Dosson cheerfully persisted.

“No, you’ll tell us enough.”

Francie had kept her eyes on the ground; the others were all now rather
unnaturally smiling. “Won’t they forgive me ever?” she asked, looking
up.

“Yes, perfectly, if you can persuade me not to stick to you. But in that
case what good will their forgiveness do you?”

“Well, perhaps it’s better to pay for it,” the girl went on.

“To pay for it?”

“By suffering something. For it WAS dreadful,” she solemnly gloomily
said.

“Oh for all you’ll suffer--!” Gaston protested, shining down on her.

“It was for you--only for you, as I told you,” Francie returned.

“Yes, don’t tell me again--I don’t like that explanation! I ought to let
you know that my father now declines to do anything for me,” the young
man added to Mr. Dosson.

“To do anything for you?”

“To make me any allowance.”

“Well, that makes me feel better. We don’t want your father’s money, you
know,” this more soothable parent said with his mild sturdiness.

“There’ll be enough for all; especially if we economise in
newspapers”--Delia carried it elegantly off.

“Well, I don’t know, after all--the Reverberator came for nothing,” her
father as gaily returned.

“Don’t you be afraid he’ll ever send it now!” she shouted in her return
of confidence.

“I’m very sorry--because they were all lovely,” Francie went on to
Gaston with sad eyes.

“Let us wait to say that till they come back to us,” he answered
somewhat sententiously. He really cared little at this moment whether
his relatives were lovely or not.

“I’m sure you won’t have to wait long!” Delia remarked with the same
cheerfulness.

“‘Till they come back’?” Mr. Dosson repeated. “Ah they can’t come back
now, sir. We won’t take them in!” The words fell from his lips with a
fine unexpected austerity which imposed itself, producing a momentary
silence, and it is a sign of Gaston’s complete emancipation that he
didn’t in his heart resent this image of eventual favours denied his
race. The resentment was rather Delia’s, but she kept it to herself, for
she was capable of reflecting with complacency that the key of the
house would after all be hers, so that she could open the door for the
Proberts if the Proberts should knock. Now that her sister’s marriage
was really to take place her consciousness that the American people
would have been resoundingly told so was still more agreeable. The
party left the Hotel de l’Univers et de Cheltenham on the morrow, but it
appeared to the German waiter, as he accepted another five-franc piece
from the happy and now reckless Gaston, that they were even yet not at
all clear as to where they were going.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Reverberator, by Henry James

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVERBERATOR ***

***** This file should be named 7529-0.txt or 7529-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/5/2/7529/

Produced by Eve Sobol

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
