The Fourth Book of Virgil's Aeneid and the Ninth Book of Voltaire's Henriad~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fourth Book of Virgil's Aeneid and the
Ninth Book of Voltaire's Henriad, by Virgil and Voltaire

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Fourth Book of Virgil's Aeneid and the Ninth Book of Voltaire's Henriad

Author: Virgil and Voltaire

Translator: Anonymous

Release Date: December 20, 2006 [EBook #20144]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIRGIL AND VOLTAIRE ***




Produced by Zoran Stefanovic, Rénald Lévesque and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net. This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale
de France (BnF/Gallica)










                           THE FOURTH BOOK
                                 of
                           VIRGIL'S ÆNEID,
                                and
                           THE NINTH BOOK
                                 of
                         VOLTAIRE'S HENRIAD.

       Translated into English verse with a view of comparison
           between the Latin, French, and English poetry.

                  By the Translator of the HENRIAD.



                               PARIS:
                      PRINTED BY CH. CRAPELET.

                                1804.




TO
MONSIEUR DELILLE.


SIR,

After reading with infinite pleasure your masterly translations of
Virgil, I have been led into a train of reflection on the mechanism of
words, and on the manners, the ideas, and pursuits of Nations in as much
as they frequently give rise to the difference of character which we
remark in their language. Few literary discussions would I think be more
curious than an impartial comparative enquiry of this kind.

Not only have the easy elegance and courtly air of your verses displayed
the French tongue in these respects worthy of your original; but have
inclined me to think that they have raised it near the highest pitch of
perfection of which it is at present capable, in the translation of a
Latin poet. After two brillant ages of literature the French language
did not, till you appeared, possess one translation of the great
masterpieces of antiquity, which might fairly be said to have attained
the rank of a classical work: while the English had been long enriched
with such translations of most of them, as will like yours, in all
probability share the immortality of their originals. In the cloud of
critics which superior lustre necessarily attracts, many perhaps were
not sufficiently aware of the peculiar difficulties of your undertaking,
from the nature of the materials which you had to employ, and some not
candid enough to compare the work which you have raised out of them,
with what they had hitherto been made to produce.

That the English language might be so managed as to surpass the French
in expression of strong sentiments, in boldness of imagery, in harmony
and variety of versification I will not be sufficiently hardy to assert.
The universality of the latter must be admitted as a strong presumption
of its general excellency. Yet I cannot help wishing, that some pen
worthy to be compared with Monsieur Delille's would give the world an
opportunity of judging whether the former may not have some pretensions
to superiority in the instances which I have mentioned.

Besides the length of time which has elapsed since the production of
Dryden's translation, you will recollect with a sigh, as I do, his own
expression: «What Virgil wrote in the vigor of age, in plenty and at
ease, I have undertaken to translate,» says Dryden, «in my declining
years, struggling with want, oppressed with sickness, curbed in my
genius, liable to be misunderstood in all I write.--What I now offer is
the wretched remainder of a sickly age, worn out by study and oppressed
by Fortune»!

It might not therefore be deemed sufficient to compare a work, produced
under such disadvantages, in the seventeenth century, (notwithstanding
the extraordinary powers of its author) with what is now becoming the
admiration of the nineteenth. Much less, sir, will it be just or candid
to suppose me capable of publishing my feeble attempt with any view of
comparison as to the merit of the performance.--Should it be asked,
what then could have been my inducement?--First, if I am fortunate
enough to excite others more capable than myself to try again the
comparative force of English language in a new translation, as you have
just shown how much can be done in French, I shall have obtained the
utmost bounds of my ambition.

Secondly, I am happy to acknowledge the pleasure which I felt an
employing some long moments of leisure, on a subject wherein your genius
had taken such delight: I hove chosen the fourth book as that which I
have had the good fortune of hearing in your own verses, with all the
charms of your own recitation; and have pursued this occupation.

    Non ita certandi cupidus, quam propter amorem
    Quod te imitari aveo----

I have the honor to be with great respect,
Your most obedient humble servant,

P. L.




                                PREFACE.


The motives and design of this attempt are sufficiently explained in the
foregoing address, the ideas which gave rise to it have been confirmed
and enlarged in its progress. As some apology for them, it may not be
improper to observe here, that the English language seems to owe a great
portion of that energy for which it is remarked, to the old Anglo Saxon
idiom, which still forms its basis. It was enriched and softened by the
introduction of the French, though some are of opinion that most of its
foreign words, were adopted immediately from the Latin and not from any
modern tongue: and this opinion is corroborated by the observation,
that, during more than a century after the conquest, very little mixture
of French is perceivable in the style of English authors. Be that as it
may, it is certain that the constant attention of its earliest writers
to the Greek and Latin models, though sometimes carried to excess, has
added grace, variety, and extent to its construction. Sir Thomas Brown
who wrote his _Pseudodoxia Epidemica_, or Enquiry into Vulgar Errors,
about the middle of the seventeenth century, and whose style is still
much commended, says in his preface to that interesting work: «I confess
that the quality of the subject, will sometimes carry us into
expressions beyond meer English apprehensions. And indeed if elegancy of
style proceedeth, and English pens maintain that stream we have of late
observed to flow from many, we shall, in a few years, be fain to learn
Latin to understand English, and a work will prove of equal facility in
either». Milton, both in his verse and prose, has carried this
affectation to such a degree, as not only to be frequently beyond a meer
English apprehension, but even beyond that of an ordinary proficient in
the learned languages. Yet, so far were these innovations from being
considered as prejudicial, that one of the most admired writers of our
days, Dr. Johnson, did not scruple to confess, that he formed his style
upon the model of Sir Thomas Brown. The great number of excellent
translations which were constantly appearing through all its progressive
stages of improvement, must naturally have given the language a
classical turn. It is scarcely possible that a work so extensive, and so
universally read, as Pope's admirable translation of Homer, should not
leave some gloss of grecism upon the idiom into which so many of its
greatest beauties had been transfused. At the same time the early and
proud independence of the middle orders of people in England, prevented
them from conforming their language, their manners, or their sentiments
to the model of a court. Whereby if their expression did not acquire
politeness from that quarter, it did not loose any of its strength.
While the energy which their language is allowed to possess is the old
inheritance of their Anglo Saxon ancestors, whatever elegance it may
have acquired, is derived rather from Athens and Rome than from St.
James's.--The varied and extended occupations of a maritime and
commercial people have increased the fund from which imagery in
discourse is drawn, and as all occupations in such a nation are deemed
honorable, no metaphor is rejected as ignoble that is apt and
expressive.

A number of ideas conveyed by monosyllables gives great force and
conciseness, but leaves the poet frequently to struggle with the
harshness of sound; nevertheless those who are conversant with English
poetry will have perceived that this difficulty is not always
insuperable. The different accentuation of the old Anglo Saxon words,
with those adopted from other tongues, affords uncommon variety and
emphasis to the numbers of English verse. The measure commonly used in
poetry of a higher style is of ten syllables, as that in French is of
twelve. Three English verses of ten syllables generally contain nearly
the same number of syllables as two Latin or Greek hexameters, but are
in most instances capable of conveying more ideas, especially in
translating from Greek which abounds so much in what seem to us
expletive particles. The _cæsura_, or pause is not invariably fixed on
the same syllable of the verse, as in French; in the choice and variety
of its position, consists the chief art of appropriate harmony.
Accentuation of syllables, which seems, to answer the idea of long and
short syllables in the dead languages, is the foundation of English,
metre.--Tripple rhymes used with judgment have been admitted by the best
English poets, and now and then the introduction of an Alexandrine, or
verse of six feet.

Though blank verse has still many admirers, the English ear is grown
remarkably delicate as to the consonance of rhymes; Dryden and Pope have
used many, which would not now be received. Masculine and feminine
rhymes are unknown in English. As the character of a language appears to
be the result of all the affections of the people who speak it, it did
not seem foreign to this design to compare the manner in which two such
great genius's as Virgil and Voltaire, have treated the same subject,
and to place the loves of Henry and Gabrielle in comparison with those
of Æneas and Dido. The elegance, the delicacies, the nicest touches of
refined gallantry come admirably forward with the brillant colouring,
the light and graceful pencil of Voltaire. The verse seems to flow from
his pen without effort into its natural channel, and some of his
descriptions would not loose by a comparison; but perhaps he has let it
be seen, that it would not be so easy a task to convey in the same
language the exquisite and deep strokes of passion, which the Roman
master has left to the admiration of the universe. To which of these
styles the English and the French languages are most fitted, and how far
they may be made to succeed in both, is one of the objects of an inquiry
which this undertaking was intended to promote.

Whatever can be said by way of comment on the fourth book of the Æneid
has been so often repeated, and is so easily to be met with, that it was
thought needless to add any notes to this new translation. The few
instances in which there may appear some difference in the
interpretation of the original are scarce worth noticing. One perhaps
may appear to require some apology; most of the translators of Virgil
have represented Dido under the most violent impression of rage in her
first speech to Æneas. Whereas it would seem that the situation of her
mind is meant to be described before she addresses him, rather as wild
and frantic with doubt and fear, than actuated by rage. Whatever anger
she may feel, is yet so much tempered by love and hope, that she breaks
out, not into the language of rage, but of the most tender
expostulation, the most lively interest in his own welfare, the most
pathetic painting of her feelings and situation. It is a beautiful
appeal to love, to honor, and to pity. Not till after his cold answer,
does she burst into all the violence of rage, of contempt, and of
despair. This gradation has often been remarked as a principal beauty.
As some excuse for the coldness of Æneas which takes away so much of the
interest of the poem, Virgil is careful to recoil continually to our
attention, that he is acting under the impulse of the divinity. Such has
been the constant practice of the ancients to prevent our disgust, for
the action which they represent. In Orestes and Phoedra it is the excuse
of the violence of passion, in Æneas of that coldness which we find it
so difficult to forgive, but which in this point of view we shall be
inclined to pity.

While these sheets were in the press MONSIEUR DELILLE has given the
world another proof of the powers of his mind, and displayed the French
language to vast advantage, in a more arduous strain of poetry that it
had yet attempted. The perspicuity for which it has always been
remarked, and to which it owes its charms in conversation as perhaps
also the dificulty with which it is adapted to works of poetical
imagination, is strongly exemplified in his translation of Paradise
Lost. If he has not always been able to make the french idiom bear him
through the ætherial regions in which the daring wing of Milton's muse
soars with so sublime a flight, he has descended not without dignity to
the sphere of human understanding. And I believe it may be safely
advanced, that it will be easier for ordinary capacities, even among
English readers, to understand the work of Milton, in this translation
than in the original.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARGUMENT.


Æneas, after escaping from the destruction of Troy and a long series of
adventures by sea and land, is driven by a storm raised by the hatred of
Juno on the coast of Affrica, where he is received by Dido, in the new
town of Carthage, which she was building, after her flight from the
cruelty of her brother in law Pigmalion, who had murdered her husband
Sicheus.--Venus dreading for her son Æneas, the influence of Juno upon
the mind of Dido, makes Cupid assume the forme of his child Julus or
Ascanius, and raise in the bosom of the Queen the most ungovernable
passion for Æneas. The fourth book begins by Dido's confessing her
weakness to her sister Anna, who gives her many plausible reasons for
indulging it, and advices her to make her peace with heaven and marry
her lover. Juno, finding herself outwitted by Venus and her favourite
Dido irrecoverably in love, accosts Venus first in a sarcastic tone but
afterwards in very persuasive language, endeavours in her turn to
deceive her, by obtaining her content to the marriage, by which means to
frustrate the fates which promised the empire of the world to the
descendants of Æneas in Italy. Venus, aware of the deceit, appears in a
very complimentary style to give into it, and consents to her projects.
While the Tyrian princess and the Trojan are hunting in a forest Juno
sends down a violent storm, and the Queen and Æneas take shelter alone
in a dark cavern.--There Juno performed the nuptial rite and the passion
of Dido was reconciled to her conscience.--Fame soon spreads the report
of this alliance.--Iarba, one of Dido's suitors, hears of it and
addresses an angry prayer to Jupiter Ammon from whom he was descended.
Jove sends down Mercury to order Æneas to leave Carthage. Dido
endeavours to make him alter this terrible resolution, falls into the
most violent paroxism of rage at his cold refusal, again melts into
tenderness, employs her sister to prevail upon Æneas, at least, to wait
till the wintry storms were past. All is in vain, and Dido resolved to
die, deceives her sister with an idea of magic rites to get rid of her
passion--and persuades her to raise a funeral pyle in her palace, Æneas
a second time admonished by Mercury sets sail; when Dido, at the break
of day, beholds his vessels out of reach she again bursts into a violent
fit of passion, but soon sinks into despair.--Accuses her sister's fatal
kindness, upbraids herself with her infidelity to the memory of Sicheus,
vents the most dreadful imprecations against Æneas and the Romans, who
were to be his ascendants, bequeaths all her hatred to her subjects,
than relaxes into a momentary tenderness at the sight of the nuptial
bed, the cloaths and pictures of Æneas which she had placed on the
funeral pyre, and at last puts an end to her life with the sword of her
faithless lover.




                          THE FOURTH BOOK
                                OF
                          VIRGIL'S ÆNEID,
                  TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE.


      While Dido, now with rising cares opprest,
      Indulg'd the pain; the flame within her breast
      In silence prey'd, and burn'd in every vein.
      Fix'd in her heart, his voice, his form remain;
  5   Still would her thought the Hero's fame retrace,
      Her fancy feed upon his heav'nly race:
      Care to her wearied frame gives no repose,
      Her anxious night no balmy slumber knows;
      And scarce the morn, in purple beams array'd,
 10   Chas'd from the humid pole the ling'ring shade,
      Her sister, fond companion of her thought,
      Thus in the anguish of her soul she sought.
      Dear Anna, tell me, why this broken rest?
      What mean these boding thoughts? who is this guest,
 15   This lovely stranger that adorns our court?
      How great his mein! and what a godlike port!
      It must be true, no idle voice of Fame,
      From heav'n, I'm sure, such forms, such virtue came.
    } Degenerate spirits are by fear betray'd,
 20 } His soul, alas, what fortunes have essay'd;
    } What feats of war!--and in what words convey'd!
      Were it not fix'd, determin'd in my mind,
      That me no more the nuptial tye shall bind,
      Since Death deceiv'd the first fond flame I knew:
 25   Were Hymen's rites less odious to my view,
      To this one fault perhaps I might give way;
      For must I own it? Anna since the day
      Sicheus fell, (that day a brother's guilt,
      A brother's blood upon our altars spilt);
 30   He, none but he, my feelings could awake,
      Or with one doubt my wav'ring bosom shake.
      Yes! these are symptoms of my former flame;
      But sooner thro' her very inmost frame,
      May gaping Earth my sinking feet betray;
 35   Jove's light'ning blast me from this vital ray
      To Hell's pale shade, and Night's eternal reign,
      Ere, sacred Honor, I thy rite profane.
      Oh, no! to whom my virgin faith I gave,
      "Twas his, and his remains within the grave".

 40   She ceas'd--but down her bosom gush'd her tears.
      "O dearer than the genial ray that cheers",
      Her sister cry'd, shall lonely grief consume,
      Lost to the joys of love your beauties bloom,
      Lost to the joys, maternal feelings share?
 45   Do shades for this, do buried ashes care?
      That new in grief no lover should succeed,
      Tyrians in vain, in vain Iarba plead;
      That every chief of Afric's wide domain,
      In triumphs proud, should learn to sue in vain;
 50   'Twas well; but why a mutual flame withstand?
      Can you forget who owns this hostile land?
      Unconquer'd Getulans your walls surround,
      The Syri untam'd, the wild Numidian bound.
      Thro' the wide desert fierce Barceans roam:
 55   Why need I mention from our former home,
      The deadly war, a brother's threats prepare?
      For me, I think, that Juno's fost'ring care,
      Some god auspicious, rais'd the winds that bore
      Those Phrygian vessels to our Lybian shore.
 60   Their godlike chief should happy Dido wed,
      How would her walls ascend, her empire spread?
      Join'd by the arms of Troy, with such allies,
      Think to what height will Punic glory rise.
      Win but the gods, their sacred off'rings pay;
 65   Detain your guest; invent some fond delay.
      See low'ring tempests o'er the ocean ply,
      The shatter'd vessels, the inclement sky».

      Each word that dropt inflam'd her burning mind,
      And all her wav'ring soul to love inclin'd;
 70   New gleams of hope in Dido's bosom play,
      And Honor's bright idea fades away.

      Fain would the sisters now, by gift and pray'r,
      With heav'n seduc'd, the conscious error share.
      At ev'ry shrine, the fav'ring gods to gain,
 75   In order due are proper victims slain;
      To Ceres, Bacchus, and the God of Light,
      And Juno most, who tends the nuptial rite.
      Herself the goblet lovely Dido bears,
      Her graceful arm the sacred vessel rears;
 80   And where the horns above the forehead join,
      Upon the snow-white heifer pours the wine:
      Before the god with awful grace she bows,
      Moves round the altar rich with daily vows,
      Hangs o'er the victim, in its bosom pries,
 85   And through the breathing entrail darts her eyes.
      Vain cares, alas! and rites too fondly paid!
      The tortur'd soul, can vows, can altars aid?
      Weak boast of priests, and ineffectual pray'rs!
      In her own heart, unknown, her fate she bears.
 90   The pleasing flame upon her vitals feeds,
      The silent wound within her bosom bleeds.

      She raves, she burns, and with uncertain mind,
      Roams o'er the town; roams like the wounded hind,
      Whom in the woods, unconscious of his deed,
 95   The hunter pierc'd, and left the trembling reed;
      O'er woods, o'er quaries, from the pain she springs,
      While in her flank the deadly arrow clings.
    } So with Æneas love-sick Dido strays,
100 } Points to her town, her Tyrian wealth displays,
    } While ev'ry look her longing soul betrays;
      And fain her lips would tell the fond desire,
      But scarce begun--the trembling words expire:
      --When later hours convivial pleasure bring,
      Then back to Troy, her thoughts impatient spring,
105   The well known story still enchants her ears,
      She hangs enamour'd on each word she hears:
      But when the moon with paler splendor glows,
      When stars descending counsel sweet repose,
      In the deserted hall, alone she mourns;
110   Each word, each look, upon her soul returns,
      She sees him absent, hears him o'er again,
      Presses the happy couch where he had lain;
      Or with the father's rising form beguil'd,
      Deludes her flame, and clasps the lovely child.
115   Each other care her burning thoughts refuse,
      In arms no more her Tyrian youth she views;
      No spreading moles the boistrous tide command;
      The tow'rs, the forts, begun, unfinish'd stand:
      The mighty structure threat'ning from on high
120   Hangs interrupted--all inactive lie
      Unbrac'd,--the vast machines that thro' the air,
      Lab'ring, the pond'rous mass, aloft, suspended bear.

      When Juno view'd the tumult in her breast,
      That Fame with Passion could no more contest,
      She sought the Cyprian queen, «What praise, what fame»
126   She cried, «what glorious triumph you may claim,
      What high renown, for you and for your son!
      Two mighty gods--one woman have undone!
      I'm not deceiv'd, I know what jealous hate
130   Our rising walls and Punic pow'r create;
      To what extreme, what purpose will it tend?
      Why may not peace and nuptial union end
      This dire debate?----You've gain'd your utmost aim;
      Thro' every fibre Dido feels the flame;
135   She doats, she burns;--then let the nuptial rite,
      At once the people, and the chiefs, unite,
      And both the nations be alike our care;
      The sceptre let the Phrygian husband bear,
      And take my Tyrians for the nuptial dow'r».

140   Venus who saw how much the Latian pow'r;
      The promised empire in the Trojan line
      Alarm'd the goddess, felt her false design,
      But smiling said, «Who madly would refuse
      Such offers--and eternal warfare choose?
145   Would Fortune friendly on our project wait.
      But doubts within my mind arise, if Fate
      And Jove allow, that, with the sons of Troy,
      The Tyrian race one empire should enjoy,
      The people mingled, and their rites combin'd.
150   'Tis yours; his queen, to try the thund'rer's mind;
      Mine to obey»--«Be that my care,» replied
      Jove's sister Queen--«Now hear what I provide:
      To-morrow, when the rising lamp of day
      Shoots o'er the humid orb its golden ray,
155   Unhappy Dido and her guest of Troy
      Together in the woods the chase enjoy,
      When ev'ry mind is on the sport intent,
      From gather'd clouds with livid light'ning rent,
      Of rain and pelting hail, a horrid show'r,
160   With peals of thunder on their heads I'll poor:
      All fly the storm, and in one dark retreat,
      The Trojan hero, and the Queen shall meet;
      There will I be; there if unchang'd your mind,
      Shall Hymen's chain at once the lovers bind».

165   The Queen of love perceiv'd her false intent,
      Smil'd at the smooth deceit, and bow'd assent.

      Aurora now her wat'ry couch forsakes,
      The chosen youth her earliest beam awakes,
      The bounding steed, the highly scented hound,
170   Nets, toils, and spears, the palace court surround.
      A favour'd band within the royal gate,
      The Queen who still delay'd, respectful wait.
      In purple trapping, burnish'd gold array'd,
      Proud on the foaming bit, her courser play'd;
175   She comes; the court her graceful steps surround;
      Her Tyrian vest, embroider'd fringes bound;
      Her quiver gold, with gold her hair enlac'd,
      A golden clasp her flowing mantle brac'd.
      Next with his Phrygian youth Iulus came
180   On wings of joy; but charms divine proclaim
      Cythereas offspring as he join'd the train.

      Thus when young Phoebus leaves the wintry plain,
      From Lycia and the Xanthian flood, retires
      To native Delos, and his sacred choirs;
185   Mingled in carols loud around his shrine,
      Cretans and Greeks, and painted Scythians join.
      Graceful on high the god o'er Cynthio glides,
      His wanton locks with pliant gold divides,
      With tender foliage crowns his radiant hair;
190   Wide sounds the dart bu spreading shoulders bear.

      Æneas moves not with inferior grace,
      Such heav'nly beauty beam'd upon his face.
      O'er hills and rocks, and thro' the pathless wood,
      From their old haunts they rouse the savage brood;
195   Here downward springs the shaggy goat, and here,
      From the steep cliff down rush the bounding deep,
      Dart from the hills, in panting herds unite,
      Stretch o'er the plain and spread their dusty flight.
      As thro' the vale Iulus winds his steed,
200   Leads on the chase, and passes all in speed,
      A nobler prey his youthful vows implore,
      The tawny lion or the foaming boar.

      But murky clouds are gath'ring round the pole-,
      In hollow murmur distant thunders roll;
205   The hail, the rain a mingled tempest pour,
      Whole rivers swelling down the mountain roar,
      The trembling youths of Troy, the Tyrian train,
      Cytherea's grandson, scatter'd o'er the plain,
      All fly the storm, and in one dark retreat
210   The Tyrian Queen and Trojan Hero meet.
      Strait nuptial Juno, gives the fatal sign;
      Pale flames the torch, and trembling Earth the shrine:
      Night spread the veil;--and to the vow they swore
      The murmuring air, ill omen'd witness bore.
215   The frighted Nymphs along the mountain height,
      In doleful cries proclaim the genial rite.
      That hour her death and all her sorrows wrought;
      Then fame and honor vanish'd from her thought;
      No more she struggles with a secret flame,
220   The crime is veil'd in wedlock's specious name.

      Soon thro' the Lybian towns, Fame blew the deed;
      Fame, that outstrips all other ills in speed,
      That feeds on motion, strengthens as she flies,
225   Weak, timid first, but soon of monstrous size,
      Her feet on earth, amid the clouds her head.

      With Heav'n incens'd, her mother Earth 'tis said,
      This sister added to the Giant brood,
      With wings, with feet, with dreadful speed endu'd.
      Huge horrid monster!----Ev'ry plume she wears
230   A watching eye conceal'd beneath it bears,
      And strange to tell--on ev'ry feather hung
      A gaping ear--a never ceasing tongue.
      Sleep never enter'd yet those glaring eyes;
      All night 'twixt earth and heav'n she buzzing flies;
235   All day sits watchful on the turrets height,
      Or palace roof, the babbling town to fright.
      Falsehood and truth, she spreads with equal real,
      To gaping crouds rejoicing to reveal
      What is, what was, and what has never been.
240   Æneas fled from Troy;--The Tyrian queen,
      Her bed, her sceptre, with an exile shares;
      And now forgetful of all other cares,
      With shameful passion blindly led astray,
      In love and joy they waste the hours away.

245   This, all around Fame glories to diffuse,
      And to Iarba next her flight pursues,
      To fan the flame that in his bosom glows.
      To Jove himself, his birth the monarch owes;
      A nymph his mother, by a forc'd embrace;
250   And to the God, the author of his race,
      Their lofty domes an hundred temples raise,
      An hundred shrines with flames perpetual blaze,
      Hung round with wreaths: through all his vast domain,
      The soil was rich with blood of victims skin.
255   He, by the dire report, to madness fir'd,
      Vents his dark soul by jealous rage inspir'd,
      Before the gods, while curling incense blaz'd,
      His suppliant hands to Jove almighty rais'd.
      «All potent Jove! those eyes that view the Moor
260   From painted coaches full libations pour,
      See they not this? Or when thy thunder rolls
      Do causeless fears, O Father, shake our souls?
      Is there no vengeance in the bolt you poise?
      Is all but fancied horror, empty noise?
265   A woman, wand'ring outcast on our shore,
      Bargains a petty spot and owns no more,
      Accepts a portion of our coast to till,
      Ev'n from our pity; from our royal will;
      And she--the offer of our hand disdains,
270   And she--Æneas in her court detains!

      That Paris, with that woman crew, that wear
      Those Phrygian bonnets on their scented hair,
      Enjoys the spoil.--while I--thy power proclaim,
      Adorn thy shrine, and feed on empty fame».
275   Thus, while he pray'd and bow'd before the shrine:
      Th' Almighty hearing, throws his eyes divine
      On Lybia's coast; there views the lovelest pair
      Forgetting fame and ev'ry nobler care,
      And quick commands the herald of the sky.
280   «Go, call the zephyrs, spread your pinnions, fly,
      Fly to the Dardan chief who ling'ring waits
      Mindless in Carthage of the promis'd fates;
      Swift as the rushing wind, my order bear.
      Not such a man--unworthy of her care,
285   His mother promis'd, when her powerful charms,
      Twice, made me save him from the Grecian arms.
      No--For Hesperia's realm a future king,
      Thro' whom, from Teucer's blood untam'd to spring
      A warlike race, the pregnant seeds to lay,
290   Of boundless empire, universal sway.
      If he, unmov'd, such' proferr'd greatness sees,
      Renouncing glory for ignoble ease.
    } Julus too, must he forego his claim?
    } Spoil'd by a father of his birthright fame,
295 } The pow'r, the glory, of the Roman name.
      What mean these structures in a hostile place?
      What hopes deceitful from his mind efface
      Th' Ausonian offspring, the Lavinian land?
      But let him sail--no more--bear my command».
300   Jove spoke--His son obey'd:--and to his feet
      Bound the light wings of gold--wings ever fleet,
      Which over earth and sea, through yielding air,
      Swift as the wind the rapid herald bear;
305   And took the rod that calls the trembling ghost
      To light, or binds it to the Stygian coast,
      Gives balmy slumber, breaks the sweet repose,
      Weighs down the lid of dying eyes that close.
      Thro' storms and dripping clouds with this he glides;
      Now o'er the summit and the hoary sides
310   Of Atlas hangs, pois'd on whose shoulders rest
      The Heav'ns: his head eternal storms infest,
      Crown'd with dark pines, inwrap'd with gloomy clouds;
      Primeval snow his shaggy bosom shrouds,
      Furrow'd with streams that down his chin descend,
315   And chains of ice from his broad beard that pend.
      Here light the God--Balanc'd his equal wings,
      And darting forward to the ocean flings.
      Through misty air as nearer earth he drew,
      Cutting the winds and whirling sands, he flew
320   Like birds, that hov'ring o'er the fishy main,
      Drop from the sky', and skim the watry plain.
      So from the height his mighty grandsire props,
      Down on the pinion light Cyllenius drops;
      And scarce his winged feet had touch'd the ground,
325   Æneas with the busy crew he found,
      Planning new structures for the rising town.
      Bright with a radiant gem his sword hung down,
      A mantle graceful o'er his shoulder thrown
      With sparkling gold and Tyrian purple shone.
330   'Twas Dido's present: thro' the blushing thread
      The docile gold her taper fingers led.
      The god accosts him.--«With uxorious care
      The walls of Carthage does Æneas rear,
      Himself forgotten and his future state?
335   But he that reigns--the pow'r who next to Fate,
      Roles Earth and Heav'n, and moves them with a nod,
      Thro' skies unclouded, he--the ruling God,
      This to your ear commands me to convey;
      Why on the Lybian shore this fond delay?
340   These rising tow'rs--If satisfied with these,
      You barter glory for ignoble ease,
      Your injur'd heir--your young Ascanius view,
      Rome and th' Italian reign to him are due.»
      While thus the God convey'd what Jove resolv'd,
345   From human eyes in air his form dissolved.

      Æneas stood with sacred terror chill'd;
      His hair erect, his lips with horror seal'd;
      Aw'd by the present God, the high command,
      He burns to fly, and leave the much lov'd land.
350   But how alas!--What words, what soothing art?
      How meet the Queen, the sad design impart?
      Now here, now there, his wav'ring soul inclin'd;
      He bends on ev'ry side his anxious mind:
      And thus at length his doubting councils end.
355   He bids Cleanthus and the chiefs attend,
      The crews assemble and the ships prepare,
      In silence hid the object of their care;
      While Dido yet the faithless dream deludes,
      And not one doubt upon her bliss intrudes:
360   That he, mean while, the fittest time would seek,
      The fittest place the sad reverse to speak.

      In secret they, the pleasing task pursue;
      But soon--(what can escape a lovers view)
      Soon Dido saw the change, her boding mind
365   Fancied, foresaw, or felt what they desgn'd.
      Trembling, alive to all she sees or hears,
      Suspecting ev'ry thing, she doubts, she fears,
      While Fame that wounded feeling never spar'd,
      The crews on board announced, the fleet prepar'd:
379   Till mad'ning flames within her bosom rise;
      Distracted, furious, o'er the town she flies,
      Wild as the Woodnymph when the frantic rite
      And Bacchanalian shout, to rage excite
      Madder and louder as the God invades,
375   She hears him bounding thro' the midnight shades.

      Dido, herself, at length, Æneas sought;
      Could you, false man, conceive the cruel thought,
      To hide a crime so great--unseen to go,--
      Silent, unnotic'd--Would you leave me so?
380   Has love no charm, has plighted faith no tie?
      Nor Dido doom'd a cruel death to dye.
      And for yourself--unfeeling!--when die skies
      With tempest low'r--when wintry blasts arise,
      You tempt the dang'rous ocean--to explore
385   A distant, strange, unhospitable shore.
      Had Troy herself existed, who would brave
      For Troy herself, the treach'rous wintry wave.
      'Tis me you fly--Oh, by your sacred vow,
      By these sad tears, (they're all that's left me now
390   To move your heart); by all our solemn ties,
      By what I've suffer'd, by our shortliv'd joys,
      If gratitude has giv'n me any right,
      If any charm in me once gave delight,
      Do not desert the wreck yourself have made,
395   Nor from my falling state withdraw your aid.
      If yet there's any pow'r in pray'rs like mine,
      Oh pity me; recal that sad design--
      See Africa pow'rs, my feeble realm pursue,
      My Tyrians hearts are gone,--'Tis all for you,
400   To you I've sacrific'd my brightest claim,
      My sacred honor--all my former fame:
      Since the dear name of husband is forgot,
      Think, cruel guest, of wretched Dido's lot.
      What prospect in her ruin'd state remains?
405   Pygmalions vengeance--proud Iarba's chains.
      Of you--of all that's dear in life bereft,
      Oh were some pledge of mutual passion left:
      Some young Æneas, in whose face alone
      His father's dear resemblance I might own,
410   With infant grace my lonely court to cheer,
      Not lost, not widow'd quite I should appear».

      She ceas'd.--With eyes unmov'd,--o'er aw'd by Jove
      He stood, and with contending passions strove.
      At length he spoke. «For ever I confess
415   I owe you all that words could e'er express,
      And in this grateful heart Eliza reigns,
      While life itself, and memory remains.
      Ne'er did I hope my voyage to conceal;
      Never, (my words are few for all I feel),
420   Be not deceiv'd, no, never did I join
      These nuptial ties, nor this alliance sign.
      Had Fate, alas, allow'd me to dispose,
      To end these troubles in the way I chose,
      The ruins of my friends, the wreck of Troy,
425   Should all my care, and all my hope employ.
      Then, sailing back to Asia's fertile shore,
      For them, should Priam's city rise once more.
      But now 'tis Italy Apollo shows,
      'Tis Italy the Lycian fates propose,
430   My country's there, there all cry vows unite.
      Far from your native soil, if you delight
      In Afric's coast, these walls if you enjoy;
      Allow Ansonia to the sons of Troy.
      We too, in foreign lands a state may raise.
435   As oft as Night her humid veil displays,
      Oft as the stars, in solemn glory rise,
      My father's murm'ring ghost before my eyes
      Brings young Ascanius, and upbraiding stands,
      And claims th' Hesperian crown, the promised lands;
440   And even now--(on both their heads I swear)
      From Joves high throne above, thro' flitting air,
    } The thund'rer's will, the herald God declar'd;
    } These eyes beheld him, and these ears have heard;
    } He past these walls, and in broad day appear'd.
445   Then cease the wounding accent of complaint--
      I follow not my will, but Heav'n's constraint».

      She heard his words--but turning from his view,
      Now here, now there, her eyes indignant threw.
      She fix'd him with a scornful silent cast,
450   All over view'd him--and burst forth at last.

      «No, faithless monster, no! Nor race divine,
      Nor Dardan sire, nor Goddess mother thine!
      Form'd in the flinty womb of rocks accurst,
455   Begot by Caucasus, by tygers nurst.
      What need I more? why doubt of what is plain?
      One sigh, one look, did all my tears obtain.
      How name his crimes? did loves extremest woe,
      Move that hard heart, or cause one tear to flow!
      But will Jove's Queen who guards the nuptial vow,
460   Will mighty Jove himself, such deeds allow?
      Whom now confide in? Cast upon my shore,
      Shipwreck'd, distress'd, a friendly aid I bore:
      Himself, his fleet, his friends, from ruin drew,
      Nay, foolish woman! shar'd my kingdom too,
465   Now,--my rage to very madness tends:
      Now Lycian fates, now Phæbus he pretends,
    } Nay mighty Jove himself, thro' flitting air
    } Sends down a god his dread command to bear.
    } A worthy object, truly, for his care!
470   A mighty thing, to break the God's repose!
      But go, such fates no longer I oppose;
      Go, seek Ausonia in the hollow wind,
      And in the frothy surge a kingdom find.
      Yes may you find--just Heav'n my wishes serve!
475   Dash'd on some rock, the fate that you deserve.
      Then, when you call on injure! Dido's name,
      I'll follow glaring in the light'ning's flame;
      When Death's cold hand this wretched soul shall free,
      My ghost shall haunt you, wheresoe'er you be.
480   Yes wretch--be sure--the vengeance will be paid.
      'Twill reach my ear--'twill sooth my angry shade».
      While yet she spoke, she trembling turn'd away,
      Broke from his sight, and shun'd the light of day.

485   She left him struck with fear, with grief opprest;
      Opposing thoughts revolv'd within his breast.
      Her languid step her maids supporting led,
      And plac'd her fainting on the nuptial bed.

      Much as he wish'd the mourner to console,
      To speak soft comfort to her wounded soul,
490   To grief, to doubt, to pow'rful love a prey,
      Jove's sov'reign will, the hero must obey,
      He views the fleet, his brave companions cheers,
      Hauls down the bark and to the ocean veers;
      The sides well calk'd, the briny wave defy,
495   The living woods, their shapeless limbs supply,
      From the green oar the bleeding leaf they tear,
      They run, they toil, they press the phasing care.

      In gath'ring numbers from the town they pour,
      Wind o'er the plain, and spread along the shore
500   Like ants, that forage for a future day,      500
      And to their stores the plunder'd wheat convey;
      In narrow columns move the sable train;
      These with main strength roll on the pond'rous grain;
      These press the march, and these the loit'rers drive;
505   They go, they come, their path seems all alive.

      Ill fated Queen! what pangs your bosom tore,
      What sighs you heav'd, as on the moving shore,
      The busy crews, assembling in your sight,
      With dashing waves, their horrid shouts unite.
510   Love, in our heart! how boundless is thy force!
      To tears again, to pray'r she has recourse;
      Love bends her soul each suppliant art to try,
      Each humble suit, ere she resolve, to die.
      «See, Anna, see, the crowded beach they hide,
515   See how they spread, they swarm from ev'ry side;
      Their open sails already court the wind,
      The stern with wreaths the joyful sailors bind.
      Oh had I thought such ills could e'er ensue
      Perhaps I should have learn'd to bear them too?
520   Now grant me, Anna, grant this one request!
      False man! his friendship you alone possest;
      To you his heart was open, none but you,
      The soft access, the pliant moment knew.
      Go sister then, my haughty foe intreat,
525   Tell him to Troy I sent no hostile fleet;
      Nor yet, at Aulis, was I one that swore,
      United vengeance to the Dardan shore.
      Have I disturb'd his father's sacred shade,
      That to be heard--not mere--in vain I've pray'd?
530   Tho' clos'd his ears to me, can be deny
      This last, this least request! where would he fly?
      Bid him remain till wintry storms subside,
      Till kinder breezes, smooth the ruffled tide.
535   The nuptial vow, which he so vainly swore,
      His plighted faith no longer I implore,
      Nor yet his Latian kingdom to forego:
      Some fruitless space, some breathing time for woe,
      'Till fate have thought the wretch subdu'd to grieve,
      Is all I beg--Obtain this last reprieve--
540   For pity gain it,--and the short delay
      With all her parting soul, will Dido pay».
      So pray'd the Queen, and o'er and o'er again,
      Pray'rs, sighs, and tears her sister urg'd in vain;
      Unmov'd he stands by tears, by pray'rs by sighs,
545   The fates oppose, the God his ear denies.
      Thus from the rock, the patient work of years,
      His knotted strength an oak majestic rears,
      When Alpine storms on ev'ry side contend,
      Now here, now there his rooted mass to bend,
550   Each labour'd limb resounds, and from his head
      The rustling spoils in heaps the ground o'erspread.
      He grasps the rock unmov'd, and proudly shoots
      As high to heav'n his head, as down to hell his roots.
      With storms as fierce the lab'ring Hero torn,
555   Now here now there by swelling passion borne
      Sunk in his soul a mighty load of woe,
      His mind unshook--tears unavailing flow.

      'Twas then that Dido, sinking with her fate,
      In all its horror view'd her wretched state.
560   The light of heav'n grew odious to her sight,
      She call'd on Death, and each religions rite
      With horrid omens urg'd the dark design:
      The milky juice flowed black upon the shrine;
      And dire to tell, the sacred wine she bore
565   Fell from the cup in fleaks of clotted gore.
      These horrid sighs, to her alone reveal'd,
      Ev'n from her sister's friendship she conceal'd.
      But more--a temple in the palace stood
      With snow-white fleeces hang, with garlands strew'd,
570   Where to her former husband's honor'd shade
      Assiduous worship, daily vows she paid:
      There, when the night, unroll'd her sable pall
      She hears his voice in doleful murmurs call,
      While from the roof the fated owl alone
575   In deep complaint prolongs the funeral tone.
      Beside, what ills had been foretold before,
      Now on her mind, a dread impression bore.
      Her aching eyes did broken slumbers close,
      Æneas like a vengeful fury rose:
580   Alone--forsaken--distant from her home,
      Driv'n o'er the desert--she appears to roam
      With sinking steps,--abandoned--left behind,
      Thro' burning sands her native Tyre to find.
      So mad Pentheus saw two suns arise,
585   Two Thebes appear before his haggard eyes.
      So wild Orestes flies his mother's rage,
      With snakes, with torches arm'd across the stage,
      To 'scape her vengeance whereso'er he goes,
      Pale furies meet him and his flight oppose.

590   Now when despair had settled on her mind,
      What way to meet the death that she design'd
      Fill'd all her thoughts. Her sister she addrest
      While treach'rous smiles beguil'd her soul distrest.
      «Rejoice, my friend, while I the means impart,
595   To gain his love or drive him from my heart:
      A place there is where Æthiopia ends,
      And into ocean's lap the sun descends;
      Where Atlas on his spreading shoulders bears,
      And turns the shining glory of the spheres.
600   Thence comes a priestess, in Massyla rear'd,
      Who for the watchful Dragon food prepar'd;
      Th' Hesperian temple 'twas her charge to keep,
      The drowsy flow'rs in liquid honey steep,
      And watch the golden branches on the tree.
605   She, at her will, the lab'ring mind can free,
      With mystic verse,--or deadly cares enforce,
      Repell the stars--arrest the rivers course;
      Raise the dead shade, the trembling mountain rend,
      And make the wood with horrid sound descend.
610   By heav'n and thee, thou nearest to my heart,
      Against my will I fly to magic art.
      But in the inmost court, in open air,
      A lofty pile thou, dearest friend, prepare,
      There let his arms, my nuptial couch that grac'd,
615   There ev'ry thing he faithless left be plac'd;
      And fast that bed--sad witness of my fall;
      The priestess orders to destroy them all.
      Of the sad deed be left no conscious trace--»
      She ceas'd and smil'd,--but death was in her face.
620   Anna obey'd; prepar'd the pyre; her mind
      Conceiv'd no fear of all the Queen design'd,
      Nor with such deep despair, her spirit fraught,
      Nor worse than when Sicheus fell she thought.
      In open air, but in a court inclos'd,
625   Rich pine and cloven oak the pyre compos'd;
      The Queen herself the lofty sides around,
      With flow'rs of death, funereal fillets bound;
      Then o'er the pyre, upon the nuptial bed,
      His sword, his portrait, all he left, she spread;
630   Her spirit labour'd with the dread design;
      All round were altars rais'd for rites divine.
      There stands the priestess with dishevell'd hair;
      (Her voice like thunder shakes the trembling air)
      Thrice on the hundred gods aloud she calls,
635   Deep night and chaos, thrice her Voice appalls;
      The triple form that Virgin Dian wears,
      Infernal Hecate's threefold nature hears.
      For stygian waters that surround the dead,
      Enchanted juice, a baleful vapour shed.
640   Black drops of venom--potent herbs she steep'd,
      With brazen scythes, by trembling Moonlight reap'd.
      And from the filly's infant forehead shorn
      A powerful philter from the mother torn.
      The Queen her sacred off'ring in her hands,
645   With one foot bar'd, before the altar stands;
      Her zone unbound releas'd her flowing vest;
      The conscious gods her dying words attest,
      The start that bear our fate, and if above
      A pow'r remains, that pities injur'd love.

650   'Twas night when o'er the earth in soft repose,
      All that exist, the load of life depose;
      When woods are hush'd, and murmuring billows done,
      When stars descending half their course have run;
      In silence all--The beasts, the feather'd brood,
655   That swim the lake, or haunt the thicket wood,
      All thro' the silent night, in balmy sleep
      Their hearts reliev'd in sweet oblivion steep.
      Not wretched Dido--night descends in vain
      Her eyes unclos'd, and unrepriev'd her pain;
660   Rest flies her soul, and sleep her couch forsakes;
      Care through the livelong night incessant wakes;
      Now love, now rage, in midnight silence nurst,
      Back on her soal with doubted fury burst.
      From wave to wave of boiling passion borne,
665   «What now remains, she cries--despis'd, forlorn,
      Must Dido now, poor suppliant wretch, implore,
      And court the husband she disdain'd before;
      Or must I on their fleet submissive wait;
      And from those Dardan lords expect my fate?
670   Oh! yes!--by former favours I may guess
      What gratitude they'll feel in my distress.
      But if--which way! what means?--What pow'r have I?
      How will their pride my humble suit deny?
      Oh senseless being! have I yet to know,
675   How far, that perjur'd, Trojan race can go?
      And then--alone attend their joyful crew,
      Or with my Tyrian force their fleet pursue?
      Yes,--and the men I scarce from home could tear,
680   Will they for me again the ocean dare.
      No--meet the death you merit.--Let the sword--
      'Tis all that's left, this sad relief afford.
      Oh, sister, to my tears so weakly kind,
      You nurst this fatal error in my mind,
    } You wrought my fate, you gave me to my foe;
685 } As Nature free, unshar'd my days might flow,
    } No guilty joy, no faithless partner know,
      No pangs like these I bear,--and not to you,
      Dear injur'd shade, Sicheus not untrue».
      Long as the gloomy shades o'erhung the pole,
690   Such cares revolving prey'd upon her soul.

      Meanwhile Æneas in his fleet repos'd,
      His doubts remov'd, and all for flight dispos'd.
      To him the form divine he'd seen before,
      Appear'd in sleep--again his mandate bore;
695   The graceful limbs of youth, the flaxen hair,
      The voice, the rosy hue, Jove's son declare.
      «O goddess born! can sleep weigh down your eyes,
      Clos'd to the dangers which around you vise?
      Senseless!--the zephyrs waste their fav'ring breath,
700   While brooding in a soul resolv'd on death
      Some black design, matures, some treach'rous blow,
      Haste then and fly, while yet you've pow'r to go.
      You'll see, if here you wait the morning ray,
      The port block'd up, the shore to flames a prey.
705   Woman's a thing so variable and light!
      Haste then away. He spoke and mix'd with night.

      Æneas trembling as the phantom flew,
      Started from sleep, and rous'd the slumb'ring crew.
      «Rise, rise, companions, each one to his oar;
710   Hoist ev'ry sail--a god sent down once more,
      Impels our flight--Be quick--stand out to sea,
      The cables cut. Great God, whoe'er you be
      Thy words again exulting we obey.
      Be present, rule our stars--direct our way
715   Propitious». He spoke, his whirling falchion drew,
      The halser cut, the bark impatient flew,
      All felt the impulse--dashing thro' the tide
      They quit the shore, their barks the ocean hide;
      The boiling wave their oars alternate sweep,
720   They bend, they pull, they cut the sounding deep.

      Now rising from Tithonius golden bed
      Fresh beams of rosy light Aurora shed;
      And as the scatter'd shades were pierc'd with grey,
      The Queen from high beheld them under way,
725   Their swelling sail the fav'ring breezes bent,
      The shore, the port, a lonely space present.
      Oh then her lovely bosom in despair
      She beat. Oh then she tore her flaxen hair.
      «He's gone--Almighty heav'n, he's gone! she cries,
730   That wand'ring exile all my pow'r defies.
      Arm, arm, my warriors--sally from the town;
      Pursue the wretches--haul my gallies down;
      Bring flaming brands, with sails with oars pursue.
      --What have I said, alas! what would I do?
735   Where am I--and my mind what phrenzy leads!
      Now Dido, now, you feel your impious deeds.
      Then was the time, your sceptre when you shar'd.
      O thou for faith, for piety rever'd!
      This, this is he whose pious shoulders bore
740   His gods, his father, from the Trojan shore!
      Why did I not those limbs to pieces tear,
      Behold the waves, the bloody fragments bear,
      Cut off his friends and sever'd with the sword,
      Serve up Ascanius at his father's board!
745   His fortune might prevail--and so it might!
      What has despair to fear--in Fortune's spite
      I'd fire the fleet, the town, the son, the sire,
      The race extinguish, and with joy expire.
      «O Sun, whose beams all earthy deeds reveal,
750   Juno who know and witness what I feel,
      Hecate whose howl the midnight hour affrights,
      Gods of my parting soul--avenging sprites,
      Accept my vow, my pray'r expiring hear;
      The ills I bear are worthy of your ear».

755   «If so the fates decree, if Jove command,
      That, he accurst, shall reach th' Italian land,
      There may he meet in arms, a warlike race,
      There helpless rove, torn from his son's embrace,
      His friends untimely end there let him feel;
760   For succour there to strangers meanly kneel;
      And when for peace, ingloriously he sues,
      His crown, his life, untimely may he lose,
      And lie unburied on the naked shore;
765   With the last breath of life this pray'r I pour.
      And you, my Tyrian friends--thro' times extent
      On that curst race eternal hatred vent.
      These gifts, these honors, let my ashes reap,
      No peace, no treaty with that people keep.
770   Rise, rise some vast avenger from my tomb,
      With fire with sword that Dardan breed consume.
      Now and as long as Fate the pow'r shall lend,
      May shore with shore--may wave with wave contend,
      So prays my soul--let arms with arms engage,
      And children's children war eternal wage.

775   So Dido pray'd, while her distracted thought
      To shun light's hated beams, impatient sought.
      To Barce then, her husband's nurse, she said,
      (Her own at Tyre, within the tomb was laid).
      Go, Barce, go my sister hither bring
780   With water sprinkled from the sacred spring;
      Bid her the victims lead, the rites prepare,
      And you yourself a sacred fillet wear:
      The rite began to Stygian Jove we'll end,
      My cares shall vanish as the flames ascend,
785   His image wasting as the pyre consumes»;
      She spoke--the step of age officious haste assumes.

      But now the ripen'd project chill'd her soul;
      Thro' starting blood her eyeballs burning roll;
      Her cheek convuls'd with spots of livid red,
790   All pale and ghastly, Death approaching spread.
      Strait to the court with darting stop she bends,
      With frantic haste the funeral pyle ascends,
      And from the scabbard draws the Dardan blade.
      (Sad gift, alas, for no such purpose made),
795   But when the bed, and Trojan vest she view'd;
      That well known bed--she paus'd--and pensive stood.
      Tears found their way--once more that bed she prest
      As these last words her parting breath exprest.
      «Dear pledges! yes!--while heaven allow'd it so?
800   Now take this soul---relieve me from this woe;
      I've liv'd, whatever fortune gave is o'er;
      No common shade I seek the dreary shore,
      My walls arise, I leave a glorious state;
      --Not unreveng'd I view'd my husband's fate;
805   Alas, too happy--had the envious gales,
      To Lybia's coast, ne'er bent the Phrygian sails».
      She ceas'd--and kiss'd again the fatal bed:
      «--And must I die--and none avenge me dead?
      Yes, yes! I die, since fate will have it so,
      Thus, even thus, well pleas'd beneath the shades I go;
810   These rising flames his cruel eye shall meet,
      A dreadful omen to attend his fleet»!

      With this they saw her falling on the sword;
      Her blood along the reeking weapon pour'd,
815   Ran trickling down her hands.--Now horrid cries
      Through all the palace all the town arise--
      Fame blows the deed--loud shouts from heav'n rebound,
      And groans and yells and female shrieks resound,
      As loud and shrill as if to foes a prey,
820   Carthage or ancient Tyre abandon'd lay,
      And thro' the temples and abodes of man,
      Fierce flames with undistinguish'd fury ran.
      Her sister hears the tumult of despair,
      She starts--she tears her breast, she reads her hair,
825   And wildly bursting thro' the gathering crowd,
      Calls on her dying sister's name aloud:
      Dido--Dear sister--how am I betray'd!
      For this, these flames--this pyre, these shrines I made.
      Oh what complaints for me forlorn suffice!
850   Could you, resolv'd to die, your friend despise,
      Was I unworthy deem'd to share your end?
      One pang our souls should free, one fate attend.
      I call'd our gods--my hands these rites prepar'd;
      You go without me, and our fate unshar'd?
835   Oh, sister! this sad deed has ruin'd all;
      With you, your state, your friends, your sister fall.
      --But pour the stream--I'll wash the blood away,
      And if some ling'ring breath of life delay,
      These lips shall catch it.--On the pyre she prest
840   Her sister, just expiring, to her breast;
      She wip'd the blood--and Dido heard her cries,
      And strove to raise in rain her languid eyes,
      They clos'd again,--and babbling in the wound
      The frothy blood hiss'd forth a horrid sound.
845   Thrice on her hand she lean'd to raise her head,
      And thrice sank down unable on her bed;
      Her eyes half fix'd, she open'd to the day,
      And groan'd that stil they felt the vivid ray.
      Till Juno who beheld her ling'ring death,
850   The painful agony of parting breath,
      Sent Iris down in pity from the sky,
      To free her soul, and loose the stubborn tye.
      For since unclaim'd by Fate, before her day,
      She fell to love forlorn a guiltless prey,
855 } To cut the tress, the queen of night delay'd,
    } The flaxen hair that on her forehead stray'd,
    } Nor yet consign'd her to the Stygian shade.

      Then Iris, going from the sunbeam drew
      A thousand colours, varying as she flew;
860   Her dewy wing in liquid azure spread,
      Dropt down the sky, and hov'ring o'er her head
      «Pluto, this fated lock I bear to thee,
      And from this body set the spirit free»,
      She said--Her fingers cut the flaxen hair,
865   The heat dissolv'd--the soul exhal'd in air.


       *       *       *       *       *




                               THE
                             HENRIAD.


                            CANTO IX.



                            ARGUMENT.

Description of the Palace of Love.--Discord implores his aid to bend the
unconquerable courage of Henry IV.--Description of Gabrielle d'Etree.
Henry, passionately enamoured with her; quits his army, and loses the
advantages of his victory at Ivry. Mornay seeks him in his retreat,
tears him from the arms of his mistress, and restores him to his army.


      WHERE fam'd Idalia's happy plains extend,
      As Europe's bounds begin and Asia's end,
      Stands an old palace, long by time rever'd;
      The first rude plan the hand of nature rear'd;
  5   But soon, disdaining Nature's simple taste,
      Intruding art the modest fabric grac'd.

      There vernal breezes fann'd the myrtle shade,
      Soft odour breath'd, and beams unclouded play'd.
      No tyrant winter e'er despoil'd the grove,
 10   Bid feather'd warblers end the note of love,
      Or bound the murm'ring rill in icy chains.
      Eternal verdure crown'd the blissful plains;
      No labour Earth requir'd, no season knew,
      Unbid by man her smiling harvest grew;
 15   Round mellow fruit, the timid blossom twin'd,
      Gay Flora's bloom to rich Pomona join'd.

      Not wanton Nature when her reign began,
      Such blessings lavish'd on her fav'rite man;
      The thoughtless joy which from abundance flows,
 20   Days without care, and nights of calm repose:
      All to delude the mind, to charm the sense,
      All Eden e'er could boast,--but innocence.

      Sweet music wafted on the balmy breeze,
      Invited languor and voluptuous ease,
 25   While am'rous lays in dulcet note proclaim
      The lovers triumph, and the fair one's shame.
      There to the laughing god in flow'rs array'd,
      The graceful throng their daily homage paid;
      There in his temple learn'd the fatal art,
 30   To please, seduce, and captivate the heart.
      Young Hope, in flatt'ring smiles for ever gay,
      To Love's mysterious altar leads the way:
      The graces round, half veil'd and half in sight,
      Enticing motion with their voice unite;
 35   While Indolence, luxurious laid along,
      Listless and loit'ring, hears the tender song.
      There, silent Myst'ry, with the veil she wears,
      And eyes conversing with the soul, appears,
      Attentive tender cares, attracting smiles,
 40   Gay sport and mirth, and all that thought beguiles.
      Lascivious pleasures group'd with wanton ease;
      And soft desires that more than pleasure please.

      Such the delightful entrance of the dome:
      But onward if with guardless step you roam,
 45   And thro' the deep recess audacious pry,
      What alter'd scenes of horror strike your eye!
      No pleasures form'd in playful groupes invite,
      No dulcet sounds the ravish'd ear delight;
 50   No tender cares:--- But in their place appear,
      Sullen Complaint, and cloy'd Disgust, and Fear;
      There, fever'd Jealousy with livid hue,
      And falt'ring steps unwinds Suspicion's clew;
      Arm'd with the blood-stain'd instruments of death,
      There, Rage and Hatred spread their poison'd breath;
 55   While Malice, brooding over secret guile,
      Repays their labour with a treach'rous smile;
      Remorse, that never sleeps, brings up the rear,
      Hates his own deed, and drops a barren tear.
      There, Love, capricious child, had chose to reign,
 60   And pains and pleasures were his motely train;
      Cruel and kind by turns, but ever blind,
      The dear delight, the torment of mankind,
      Thro' ev'ry camp, thro' ev'ry senate glides,
      Commands the warrior, o'er the judge presides;
 65   Still welcome to the heart, he still deceives,
      Pants in each bosom, thro' all nature lives.

      High on a throne of endless conquest vain,
      Love bids the monarch drag his servile chain;
      And glorying less to please, than to destroy,
 70   In scenes of woe exults with savage joy.

      Him, Discord sought, by Rage relentless led,
      The timid pleasures knew the fiend and fled;
      Her eyes were fire, fresh blood her forehead dy'd,
      Around she whirl'd her flaming torch, and cry'd:
 75   «Why sleeps my brother o'er the poison'd dart?
      His pow'r forgetting o'er the human heart?
      Did ever Love the flames of Discord waft,
      Or Discord's venom tinge Love's deadly shaft?
      Did I for Love, bid madd'ning worlds engage?
 80   Rise then--avenge my insult, serve my rage;
      Behold a conqu'ring king my pow'r defy!
      Crush'd by his hand, behold my serpents die!
      See dove-ey'd Mercy smiling by his side,
      Thro' fields of civil rage his faithful guide;
 85   See to his standard ev'ry heart return,
      While I my falling empire vainly mourn:
      Let him, with her, obtain one conquest more,
      Paris is his, and Discord's reign is o'er:
      Her smiles will gild the triumph which he gains,
 90   Then what is left for me but hopeless chains!
      But Love shall wind this torrent from its course,
      And soil his glories in their limpid sourse;
      Spite of the virtues which adorn his mind,
      In am'rous chains that haughty spirit bind.
 95   Can you forget what heroes once you charm'd,
      Whom at her feet fair Omphale disarm'd?
      Whose purple sail before Augustus flew,
      Who lost the world for Egypt's queen and you?
      To these proud trophies Henry's name unite,
100   Beneath your myrtle all his laurels blight:
      You serve yourself, when you my throne maintain,
      For Lore and Discord must together reign».
      So spoke the monster, and the vault around
      Trembling, threw back on Earth the deadly sound.

105   Love heard, and answ'ring with a doubtful smile,
      Where half was sweetness, half insidious guile,
      His golden quiver o'er his shoulder threw,
      And gliding soft thro' yielding azure flew.
      Pleasure, the graces, and unthinking sport,
110   Born by the Zephyr, were his wanton court.

      Pois'd on his even wing, he look'd with joy
      On Simois, and the plain where once was Troy;
      A smile the triumph of his heart betray'd,
      To view the mighty ruin Love had made.
115   On Venice, long were bent his partial eyes,
      Thro' the blue main where gilded domes arise:
      Old Neptune saw them pierce the curling wave,
      Own'd the audacious conquest,--and forgave.
      To fam'd Sicilia next his flight he bends,
120   Stoops on the purple pinion, and descends
      Where he himself inspir'd the Mantuan swain,
      And taught Theocritus his tender strain;
      There, Fame reports, by ways unknown, he led
      The am'rous stream to Arethusa's bed.
125   Then on the downy sail he sought Vaucluse,
      Retreat of Petrarch's love and Petrarch's muse;
      Fond Echo yet remember's Laura's name;
      And what she gave in love repays in fame.
      Eure's winding shores his fond attention draw,
130   Where Love's own work, Anet's proud dome he saw;
      The fretted ceiling, Henry's cypher grac'd,
      By Love himself with fair Diana's plac'd.
      The graces dropt a crystal tear, and threw
      Around her urn fresh roses as they flew.

135   His wing at length on Ivry's plain he clos'd,
      Where Bourbon's thunder for a lime repos'd;
      But while the native of the wood he chas'd,
      The manly sport war's dreadful image trac'd.
      Love spread his chains, and sharp'ning ev'ry dart,
140   Inhuman pleasure bounded in his heart.

      «Arise ye winds,» he cried, «the storm prepare,
      Collect the pregnant clouds, and dim the air;
      The hanging torrent from their bosom pour,
      Bid forked lightening fly, and thunders roar».
145   Too soon the blust'ring slaves his will obey'd
      Their dusky pinions spread a moving shade;
    } O'er the bright scene, dark low'ring mist they drove,
    } The languid beam with night usurping strove,
    } Pale Nature wept the change and knew the work of Love.

150   Benighted and alone, the king pursu'd
      A light that glimmer'd thro' the distant wood:
      Love whirl'd his torch, and cast the treach'rous ray,
      Like earth-born vapours glitt'ring to betray:
      Which lead the trav'ller to the fatal brink,
155   Then leave him to his wretched doom and link.

      Fate so decreed it--in this lonely spot,
      Retreat and calm, a noble fair one sought;
      Far from the tumult of contending arms,
      A solitary castle hid her charms,
160   Her tender form from all mankind conceal'd,
      While war detain'd her father in the field.
      But while his sov'reign's toil the vet'ren shar'd,
      His lovely child the fost'ring graces rear'd.
      D'Etree (that name the favour'd mortal bore),
165   Of ev'ry, charm exhausted Nature's store.
      Not on Eurota's bank, so beauteous shone
      The faithless partner of the Spartan throne;
      Not she who conquer'd, whom the world obey'd,
      On Cydnus when in pomp of charms array'd,
170   Mortals deceiv'd, in awful rapture gaz'd,
      And incense to the present goddess blaz'd.
      Scarce had she gain'd the charming dang'rous years,
      A pow'r too sure, when rising passion bears.
      Pure as heav'ns image in the crystal deep,
175   Ere clouds arise, when wanton zephyrs sleep,
      Her breast for love and gen'rous feeling form'd,
      No sigh had heav'd, no tender passion warm'd.

      In vain the treasures of the budding rose,
      From am'rous gales their modest folds enclose;
180   As vernal suns each timid charm display,
      They yield, and blushing, own the genial ray.

      Love, treacherous god, still fertile in deceit,
      Long sought the maid, yet seem'd by chance to meet.
      A shepherd's boy he came, in outward shew,
185   His back no quiver bore, his hand no bow:
      Careless he cried,--but so that she might hear,
      «See Ivry's hero thro' our grove appear!
      See Henry comes!» The voice of Love conveys
      A secret wish to see him, and to please:
190   A conscious blush diffus'd a livelier hue,
      Love felt the charm, and glory'd in the view.
      Sure of his triumph with such beauty's aid,
      Full in the monarch's sight he plac'd the maid.
      Around her dress he threw that careless air,
195   It seem'd what Nature's self would choose to wear;
      Her auburn locks in easy tresses play'd,
      Now hid her snowy neck, and now betray'd;
      No muse can paint what playful zephyr show'd,
      Nor tell the charm that modesty bestow'd:
200   Not the stiff airs that prudish virtue arm,
      The foes of love, the bane of ev'ry charm:
      Sweet, bashful grace, that bends the timid eye,
      Spreads o'er the glowing cheek a heav'nly dye,
      With soft respect extatic rapture blends,
205   And heavn's pure bliss to Love triumphant lends.

      But Love does more: for Love what pow'r can bound?
      A charm invincible he calls around,
      Their tender boughs enchanted myrtles spread,
      Rise thro' the earth and wave their taper head:
210   Deluded mortals seek the tempting shades,
      The secret charm their languid sense invades,
      Around, a stream in lulling manner flows,
      Of deep forgetfulness, of soft repose;
      Bound in the chain no more they seek to move;
215   Fame, honor, duty, what are you to Love?
      Here all alike the sweet delusion share,
      And breathe delicious poison with the air.
      All whispers love, the birds on ev'ry spray
      Prolong the kiss, and swell the am'rous lay;
220   The hardy swain, who with the peep of dawn,
      Jocund and careless sought the russet lawn,
      Heaves as he goes involuntary sighs;
      Unusual troubles in his breast arise,
      Beat in his pulse, his loit'ring feet retain;
225   Neglected lye the treasures of the plain:
      The same soft charm the trembling maid deceives,
      The herd forgot, the sheaf unbound she leaves.
      How could d'Etree with such a pow'r contest!
      A god invincible her soul possest.
230   In vain, alas! that fatal day she strove,
      With youth, with glory, with her heart and love.
      In rain a rising voice in Henry's breast,
      Back to his ranks the love-lost hero prest;
      A pow'r unseen repell'd the gen'rous thought,
235   His virtue vainly in himself he sought;
      His soul empassion'd, deaf to honor's call,
      Could hear but love, d'Etree possess'd it all.

      Meanwhile his chiefs, impatient on the plain,
      His absence mourn'd, and sought their king in vain;
240   A thousand dangers for his life appear'd,
      For Henry's fame what danger could be fear'd?
      No hope of victory the troops inspir'd,
      Lost was their ardor when their chief retir'd.
      Still the good genius of the realm was near,
245   To cheer their courage, to dispel their fear.
      Summon'd by Lewis, from the realm of light
      Downward the spirit shap'd his rapid flight,
      Around this earthly planet cast his eyes,
      To find below a mortal truly wise.
250   Not in the noisy school, or silent cell
      Where pray'r, and meagre fast, and study dwell;
      Amid the tumult of the martial train,
      With rest and conquest flush'd, on Ivry's plain,
      Where Calvin's banners to the sky were rear'd,
255   The man he sought, the real sage appear'd:
      Mornay was he.--Heav'n form'd the man, to show
      That Reason's light may guide us here below;
      Plato her voice, and good Aurelius heard,
      She led the Pagan right, when Christian's err'd.

260   Such modest candour temper'd manly sense,
      When Mornay censur'd, none could take offense;
      For truth by him, in winning form convey'd,
      Was but the virtue which his life display'd.
      Still lean'd his heart the faults of men to bear,
265   While reason told him, all men had their share;
      But mid surrounding vices ever pure,
      Nor ease nor pleasure could his soul allure.
      As thro' the bosom of the briny tide,
      Thy limpid waters Arethusa glide,
270   And yet unsully'd by the neighb'ring deep,
      Unmix'd and pure their spotless tenor keep.

      By friendship guided, gen'rous Mornay came
      Where loiter'd Henry, mindless of his fame;
275   The artful god prolong'd the am'rous trance,
      And in her hero rul'd the fate of France.
      No sameness there the varied bliss destroy'd,
      No languor chill'd, no forward pleasure cloy'd;
      Each wish attain'd, another wish inspires;
280   Each new enjoyment led to new desires:
      Such vary'd ways to please, love taught d'Etree,
      Nor time nor habit stole one charm away.
      The god with anger blushing as he view'd
      Mornay and wisdom on his reign intrude:
      Turn'd with revengeful instinct to his dart,
285   And aim'd the deadly shaft at Mornay's heart.
      His anger and his arms the sage defy'd,
      His breast the bounding arrow turn'd aside:
      Impatient for the monarch's lonely hour,
      He rov'd indignant thro' th' enchanted bow'r.

290   Where silver streams a myrtle grove inclose,
      The veil that timid love and mystry chose,
      With all her charms d'Etree her lover blest:
      Now flames consume, now languor fills his breast;
      Soft drops of pleasure glisten'd in their eyes,
295   Voluptuous tear that love knows how to prize;
      No coy reserve the burning bliss restrain'd,
      Fond passion, prodigal of pleasure, reign'd;
      While Love's mute eloquence their lips employ,
      Short sighs and gentle murmurs speak their joy:
300   Their panting hearts with glowing transport swell,
      Which love alone inspires, alone can tell.

      Young pleasures sporting in luxurious ease,
      And infant Cupid's on his amour seize;
      Some dragg'd the bloody cuirass o'er the ground,
305   Or from his thigh, the pond'rous blade unbound;
      Some from the casque the crystal torrent pour'd,
      To wash the crimson spot that stain'd the sword,
      And laugh as in their feeble hand they wield
      The crown's support, the terror of the field.
310   Discord, who view'd him with insulting spite,
      In savage accents utter'd fierce delight;
      Rous'd up the league, the happy moment prest,
      Reviv'd her serpents drooping in her breast;
      And while the monarch languished in repose,
315   Blew the shrill blast, that gathered all his foes.

      A conscious blush on Henry's forehead glow'd
      As Mornay met him in the soft abode:
      Silent at first, the mutual look they fear'd,
      But in that silence all the mind appear'd:
320   And Mornay's eye to Henry's soul convey'd,
      How wide from virtue and from fame he stray'd.

      The gentlest touch of blame we scarce endure,
      How oft we loose the friend we mean to cure;
      But Henry thus:--«My friend, be ever dear,
325   Who speaks of virtue most be welcome here;
      Come to my heart, which yet for glory burns;
      My fame, my spirit, with my friend returns;
      Away the sweets of vile ignoble rest!
      The soft delusion which my soul possest!
330   Far be the slave enamour'd of his chains;
      The last great conquest o'er myself remains:
      Glory beams forth--and love no more shall sway.
      The blood of Spain shall wash the stain away».

      «There», Mornay cried,« the monarch's voice I own;
335   There spoke the guardian of the Gallic throne:
      Love thus subdu'd, adds lustre to your state;
      Blest who ne'er feels it,--but who conquers, great».

      As Henry's lip pronounc'd the last forewel,
      What advers passions in his soul rebel?
340   Full of the beauty he adores and flies,
      He blames the tear, yet tears still fill his eyes:
      Now Mornay calls, now tender love retains;
      He goes, returns, and going still remains:
      But when she languish'd in his last embrace,
345   Colour and life forsook her lovely face,
      A sudden night obsur'd her radiant eyes:
      The God beheld--air echo'd with his cries;
      He trembled that the envious shades of night
      Should rob his empire of a nymph so bright,
350   And quench for ever 'mid th' unfeeling dead,
      The flame those heav'nly eyes were form'd to spread;
      He prest the drooping beauty in his arms;
      With gentle sound recall'd her faded charms;
      Her eyes half open'd, sought her love in vain,
355   His name she sigh'd, and dropp'd their lids again.
      To life, to love, the god recall'd the fair,
      And bid young Hope repeat the tender pray'r.
      But Mornay's soul, nor grief, nor beauty move,
      Virtue and glory triumph over love:
360   The vanquish'd God, with sullen shame withdrew,
      And far from Anet's domes indignant flew.


FINIS.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fourth Book of Virgil's Aeneid and
the Ninth Book of Voltaire's Henriad, by Virgil and Voltaire

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIRGIL AND VOLTAIRE ***

***** This file should be named 20144-8.txt or 20144-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/1/4/20144/

Produced by Zoran Stefanovic, Rénald Lévesque and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net. This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale
de France (BnF/Gallica)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
