My Lady's Money~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Lady’s Money, by Wilkie Collins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: My Lady’s Money

Author: Wilkie Collins

Release Date: March 21, 2006 [EBook #1628]
Last Updated: September 13, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY LADY’S MONEY ***




Produced by James Rusk and David Widger





MY LADY’S MONEY

by Wilkie Collins




AN EPISODE IN THE LIFE OF A YOUNG GIRL

PERSONS OF THE STORY


Women:


Lady Lydiard (Widow of Lord Lydiard)

Isabel Miller (her Adopted Daughter)

Miss Pink (of South Morden)

The Hon. Mrs. Drumblade (Sister to the Hon. A. Hardyman)


Men

The Hon. Alfred Hardyman (of the Stud Farm)

Mr. Felix Sweetsir (Lady Lydiard’s Nephew)

Robert Moody (Lady Lydiard’s Steward)

Mr. Troy (Lady Lydiard’s Lawyer)

Old Sharon (in the Byways of Legal Bohemia)


Animal

Tommie (Lady Lydiard’s Dog)




PART THE FIRST.

THE DISAPPEARANCE.



CHAPTER I.

OLD Lady Lydiard sat meditating by the fireside, with three letters
lying open on her lap.

Time had discolored the paper, and had turned the ink to a brownish hue.
The letters were all addressed to the same person--“THE RT. HON. LORD
LYDIARD”--and were all signed in the same way--“Your affectionate
cousin, James Tollmidge.” Judged by these specimens of his
correspondence, Mr. Tollmidge must have possessed one great merit as a
letter-writer--the merit of brevity. He will weary nobody’s patience,
if he is allowed to have a hearing. Let him, therefore, be permitted, in
his own high-flown way, to speak for himself.

_First Letter._--“My statement, as your Lordship requests, shall be
short and to the point. I was doing very well as a portrait-painter
in the country; and I had a wife and children to consider. Under
the circumstances, if I had been left to decide for myself, I should
certainly have waited until I had saved a little money before I ventured
on the serious expense of taking a house and studio at the west end of
London. Your Lordship, I positively declare, encouraged me to try the
experiment without waiting. And here I am, unknown and unemployed, a
helpless artist lost in London--with a sick wife and hungry children,
and bankruptcy staring me in the face. On whose shoulders does this
dreadful responsibility rest? On your Lordship’s!”

_Second Letter._--“After a week’s delay, you favor me, my Lord, with a
curt reply. I can be equally curt on my side. I indignantly deny that
I or my wife ever presumed to see your Lordship’s name as a means
of recommendation to sitters without your permission. Some enemy has
slandered us. I claim as my right to know the name of that enemy.”

_Third (and last) Letter._--“Another week has passed--and not a word
of answer has reached me from your Lordship. It matters little. I have
employed the interval in making inquiries, and I have at last discovered
the hostile influence which has estranged you from me. I have been, it
seems, so unfortunate as to offend Lady Lydiard (how, I cannot imagine);
and the all-powerful influence of this noble lady is now used against
the struggling artist who is united to you by the sacred ties of
kindred. Be it so. I can fight my way upwards, my Lord, as other men
have done before me. A day may yet come when the throng of carriages
waiting at the door of the fashionable portrait-painter will include her
Ladyship’s vehicle, and bring me the tardy expression of her Ladyship’s
regret. I refer you, my Lord Lydiard, to that day!”

Having read Mr. Tollmidge’s formidable assertions relating to herself
for the second time, Lady Lydiard’s meditations came to an abrupt end.
She rose, took the letters in both hands to tear them up, hesitated, and
threw them back in the cabinet drawer in which she had discovered them,
among other papers that had not been arranged since Lord Lydiard’s
death.

“The idiot!” said her Ladyship, thinking of Mr. Tollmidge, “I never even
heard of him, in my husband’s lifetime; I never even knew that he was
really related to Lord Lydiard, till I found his letters. What is to be
done next?”

She looked, as she put that question to herself, at an open newspaper
thrown on the table, which announced the death of “that accomplished
artist Mr. Tollmidge, related, it is said, to the late well-known
connoisseur, Lord Lydiard.” In the next sentence the writer of the
obituary notice deplored the destitute condition of Mrs. Tollmidge and
her children, “thrown helpless on the mercy of the world.” Lady Lydiard
stood by the table with her eyes on those lines, and saw but too plainly
the direction in which they pointed--the direction of her check-book.

Turning towards the fireplace, she rang the bell. “I can do nothing in
this matter,” she thought to herself, “until I know whether the report
about Mrs. Tollmidge and her family is to be depended on. Has Moody
come back?” she asked, when the servant appeared at the door. “Moody”
 (otherwise her Ladyship’s steward) had not come back. Lady Lydiard
dismissed the subject of the artist’s widow from further consideration
until the steward returned, and gave her mind to a question of domestic
interest which lay nearer to her heart. Her favorite dog had been ailing
for some time past, and no report of him had reached her that morning.
She opened a door near the fireplace, which led, through a little
corridor hung with rare prints, to her own boudoir. “Isabel!” she called
out, “how is Tommie?”

A fresh young voice answered from behind the curtain which closed the
further end of the corridor, “No better, my Lady.”

A low growl followed the fresh young voice, and added (in dog’s
language), “Much worse, my Lady--much worse!”

Lady Lydiard closed the door again, with a compassionate sigh for
Tommie, and walked slowly to and fro in her spacious drawing-room,
waiting for the steward’s return.

Accurately described, Lord Lydiard’s widow was short and fat, and, in
the matter of age, perilously near her sixtieth birthday. But it may be
said, without paying a compliment, that she looked younger than her age
by ten years at least. Her complexion was of that delicate pink tinge
which is sometimes seen in old women with well-preserved constitutions.
Her eyes (equally well preserved) were of that hard light blue color
which wears well, and does not wash out when tried by the test of
tears. Add to this her short nose, her plump cheeks that set wrinkles at
defiance, her white hair dressed in stiff little curls; and, if a doll
could grow old, Lady Lydiard, at sixty, would have been the living
image of that doll, taking life easily on its journey downwards to the
prettiest of tombs, in a burial-ground where the myrtles and roses grew
all the year round.

These being her Ladyship’s personal merits, impartial history must
acknowledge, on the list of her defects, a total want of tact and taste
in her attire. The lapse of time since Lord Lydiard’s death had left her
at liberty to dress as she pleased. She arrayed her short, clumsy figure
in colors that were far too bright for a woman of her age. Her dresses,
badly chosen as to their hues, were perhaps not badly made, but were
certainly badly worn. Morally, as well as physically, it must be said of
Lady Lydiard that her outward side was her worst side. The anomalies
of her dress were matched by the anomalies of her character. There were
moments when she felt and spoke as became a lady of rank; and there were
other moments when she felt and spoke as might have become the cook in
the kitchen. Beneath these superficial inconsistencies, the great heart,
the essentially true and generous nature of the woman, only waited the
sufficient occasion to assert themselves. In the trivial intercourse
of society she was open to ridicule on every side of her. But when a
serious emergency tried the metal of which she was really made, the
people who were loudest in laughing at her stood aghast, and wondered
what had become of the familiar companion of their everyday lives.

Her Ladyship’s promenade had lasted but a little while, when a man in
black clothing presented himself noiselessly at the great door which
opened on the staircase. Lady Lydiard signed to him impatiently to enter
the room.

“I have been expecting you for some time, Moody,” she said. “You look
tired. Take a chair.”

The man in black bowed respectfully, and took his seat.




CHAPTER II.

ROBERT MOODY was at this time nearly forty years of age. He was a
shy, quiet, dark person, with a pale, closely-shaven face, agreeably
animated by large black eyes, set deep in their orbits. His mouth was
perhaps his best feature; he had firm, well-shaped lips, which softened
on rare occasions into a particularly winning smile. The whole look of
the man, in spite of his habitual reserve, declared him to be eminently
trustworthy. His position in Lady Lydiard’s household was in no sense
of the menial sort. He acted as her almoner and secretary as well as her
steward--distributed her charities, wrote her letters on business, paid
her bills, engaged her servants, stocked her wine-cellar, was authorized
to borrow books from her library, and was served with his meals in his
own room. His parentage gave him claims to these special favors; he was
by birth entitled to rank as a gentleman. His father had failed at a
time of commercial panic as a country banker, had paid a good dividend,
and had died in exile abroad a broken-hearted man. Robert had tried
to hold his place in the world, but adverse fortune kept him down.
Undeserved disaster followed him from one employment to another, until
he abandoned the struggle, bade a last farewell to the pride of other
days, and accepted the position considerately and delicately offered to
him in Lady Lydiard’s house. He had now no near relations living, and
he had never made many friends. In the intervals of occupation he led a
lonely life in his little room. It was a matter of secret wonder among
the women in the servants’ hall, considering his personal advantages and
the opportunities which must surely have been thrown in his way, that
he had never tempted fortune in the character of a married man. Robert
Moody entered into no explanations on that subject. In his own sad and
quiet way he continued to lead his own sad and quiet life. The women all
failing, from the handsome housekeeper downward, to make the smallest
impression on him, consoled themselves by prophetic visions of his
future relations with the sex, and predicted vindictively that “his time
would come.”

“Well,” said Lady Lydiard, “and what have you done?”

“Your Ladyship seemed to be anxious about the dog,” Moody answered, in
the low tone which was habitual to him. “I went first to the veterinary
surgeon. He had been called away into the country; and--”

Lady Lydiard waved away the conclusion of the sentence with her hand.
“Never mind the surgeon. We must find somebody else. Where did you go
next?”

“To your Ladyship’s lawyer. Mr. Troy wished me to say that he will have
the honor of waiting on you--”

“Pass over the lawyer, Moody. I want to know about the painter’s widow.
Is it true that Mrs. Tollmidge and her family are left in helpless
poverty?”

“Not quite true, my Lady. I have seen the clergyman of the parish, who
takes an interest in the case--”

Lady Lydiard interrupted her steward for the third time. “Did you
mention my name?” she asked sharply.

“Certainly not, my Lady. I followed my instructions, and described you
as a benevolent person in search of cases of real distress. It is quite
true that Mr. Tollmidge has died, leaving nothing to his family. But the
widow has a little income of seventy pounds in her own right.”

“Is that enough to live on, Moody?” her Ladyship asked.

“Enough, in this case, for the widow and her daughter,” Moody answered.
“The difficulty is to pay the few debts left standing, and to start the
two sons in life. They are reported to be steady lads; and the family is
much respected in the neighborhood. The clergyman proposes to get a few
influential names to begin with, and to start a subscription.”

“No subscription!” protested Lady Lydiard. “Mr. Tollmidge was Lord
Lydiard’s cousin; and Mrs. Tollmidge is related to his Lordship by
marriage. It would be degrading to my husband’s memory to have the
begging-box sent round for his relations, no matter how distant they may
be. Cousins!” exclaimed her Ladyship, suddenly descending from the lofty
ranges of sentiment to the low. “I hate the very name of them! A person
who is near enough to me to be my relation and far enough off from me
to be my sweetheart, is a double-faced sort of person that I don’t like.
Let’s get back to the widow and her sons. How much do they want?”

“A subscription of five hundred pounds, my Lady, would provide for
everything--if it could only be collected.”

“It _shall_ be collected, Moody! I will pay the subscription out of my
own purse.” Having asserted herself in those noble terms, she spoilt the
effect of her own outburst of generosity by dropping to the sordid view
of the subject in her next sentence. “Five hundred pounds is a good bit
of money, though; isn’t it, Moody?”

“It is, indeed, my Lady.” Rich and generous as he knew his mistress
to be, her proposal to pay the whole subscription took the steward by
surprise. Lady Lydiard’s quick perception instantly detected what was
passing in his mind.

“You don’t quite understand my position in this matter,” she said. “When
I read the newspaper notice of Mr. Tollmidge’s death, I searched among
his Lordship’s papers to see if they really were related. I discovered
some letters from Mr. Tollmidge, which showed me that he and Lord
Lydiard were cousins. One of those letters contains some very painful
statements, reflecting most untruly and unjustly on my conduct; lies,
in short,” her Ladyship burst out, losing her dignity, as usual. “Lies,
Moody, for which Mr. Tollmidge deserved to be horsewhipped. I would have
done it myself if his Lordship had told me at the time. No matter; it’s
useless to dwell on the thing now,” she continued, ascending again to
the forms of expression which became a lady of rank. “This unhappy man
has done me a gross injustice; my motives may be seriously misjudged, if
I appear personally in communicating with his family. If I relieve them
anonymously in their present trouble, I spare them the exposure of a
public subscription, and I do what I believe his Lordship would have
done himself if he had lived. My desk is on the other table. Bring it
here, Moody; and let me return good for evil, while I’m in the humor for
it!”

Moody obeyed in silence. Lady Lydiard wrote a check.

“Take that to the banker’s, and bring back a five-hundred pound note,”
 she said. “I’ll inclose it to the clergyman as coming from ‘an unknown
friend.’ And be quick about it. I am only a fallible mortal, Moody.
Don’t leave me time enough to take the stingy view of five hundred
pounds.”

Moody went out with the check. No delay was to be apprehended in
obtaining the money; the banking-house was hard by, in St. James’s
Street. Left alone, Lady Lydiard decided on occupying her mind in the
generous direction by composing her anonymous letter to the clergyman.
She had just taken a sheet of note-paper from her desk, when a servant
appeared at the door announcing a visitor--

“Mr. Felix Sweetsir!”




CHAPTER III.

“MY nephew!” Lady Lydiard exclaimed in a tone which expressed
astonishment, but certainly not pleasure as well. “How many years is it
since you and I last met?” she asked, in her abruptly straightforward
way, as Mr. Felix Sweetsir approached her writing-table.

The visitor was not a person easily discouraged. He took Lady Lydiard’s
hand, and kissed it with easy grace. A shade of irony was in his manner,
agreeably relieved by a playful flash of tenderness.

“Years, my dear aunt?” he said. “Look in your glass and you will see
that time has stood still since we met last. How wonderfully well you
wear! When shall we celebrate the appearance of your first wrinkle? I am
too old; I shall never live to see it.”

He took an easychair, uninvited; placed himself close at his aunt’s
side, and ran his eye over her ill-chosen dress with an air of satirical
admiration. “How perfectly successful!” he said, with his well-bred
insolence. “What a chaste gayety of color!”

“What do you want?” asked her Ladyship, not in the least softened by the
compliment.

“I want to pay my respects to my dear aunt,” Felix answered, perfectly
impenetrable to his ungracious reception, and perfectly comfortable in a
spacious arm-chair.

No pen-and-ink portrait need surely be drawn of Felix Sweetsir--he is
too well-known a picture in society. The little lithe man, with his
bright, restless eyes, and his long iron-gray hair falling in curls to
his shoulders, his airy step and his cordial manner; his uncertain age,
his innumerable accomplishments, and his unbounded popularity--is he not
familiar everywhere, and welcome everywhere? How gratefully he receives,
how prodigally he repays, the cordial appreciation of an admiring
world! Every man he knows is “a charming fellow.” Every woman he sees
is “sweetly pretty.” What picnics he gives on the banks of the Thames in
the summer season! What a well-earned little income he derives from the
whist-table! What an inestimable actor he is at private theatricals
of all sorts (weddings included)! Did you never read Sweetsir’s novel,
dashed off in the intervals of curative perspiration at a German bath?
Then you don’t know what brilliant fiction really is. He has never
written a second work; he does everything, and only does it once. One
song--the despair of professional composers. One picture--just to show
how easily a gentleman can take up an art and drop it again. A
really multiform man, with all the graces and all the accomplishments
scintillating perpetually at his fingers’ ends. If these poor pages
have achieved nothing else, they have done a service to persons not
in society by presenting them to Sweetsir. In his gracious company
the narrative brightens; and writer and reader (catching reflected
brilliancy) understand each other at last, thanks to Sweetsir.

“Well,” said Lady Lydiard, “now you are here, what have you got to say
for yourself? You have been abroad, of course! Where?”

“Principally at Paris, my dear aunt. The only place that is fit to live
in--for this excellent reason, that the French are the only people who
know how to make the most of life. One has relations and friends in
England and every now and then one returns to London--”

“When one has spent all one’s money in Paris,” her Ladyship interposed.
“That’s what you were going to say, isn’t it?”

Felix submitted to the interruption with his delightful good-humor.

“What a bright creature you are!” he exclaimed. “What would I not give
for your flow of spirits! Yes--one does spend money in Paris, as you
say. The clubs, the stock exchange, the race-course: you try your luck
here, there, and everywhere; and you lose and win, win and lose--and you
haven’t a dull day to complain of.” He paused, his smile died away, he
looked inquiringly at Lady Lydiard. “What a wonderful existence
yours must be,” he resumed. “The everlasting question with your needy
fellow-creatures, ‘Where am I to get money?’ is a question that has
never passed your lips. Enviable woman!” He paused once more--surprised
and puzzled this time. “What is the matter, my dear aunt? You seem to be
suffering under some uneasiness.”

“I am suffering under your conversation,” her Ladyship answered sharply.
“Money is a sore subject with me just now,” she went on, with her eyes
on her nephew, watching the effect of what she said. “I have spent five
hundred pounds this morning with a scrape of my pen. And, only a
week since, I yielded to temptation and made an addition to my
picture-gallery.” She looked, as she said those words, towards an
archway at the further end of the room, closed by curtains of purple
velvet. “I really tremble when I think of what that one picture cost me
before I could call it mine. A landscape by Hobbema; and the National
Gallery bidding against me. Never mind!” she concluded, consoling
herself, as usual, with considerations that were beneath her. “Hobbema
will sell at my death for a bigger price than I gave for him--that’s one
comfort!” She looked again at Felix; a smile of mischievous
satisfaction began to show itself in her face. “Anything wrong with your
watch-chain?” she asked.

Felix, absently playing with his watch-chain, started as if his aunt
had suddenly awakened him. While Lady Lydiard had been speaking, his
vivacity had subsided little by little, and had left him looking so
serious and so old that his most intimate friend would hardly have known
him again. Roused by the sudden question that had been put to him, he
seemed to be casting about in his mind in search of the first excuse for
his silence that might turn up.

“I was wondering,” he began, “why I miss something when I look round
this beautiful room; something familiar, you know, that I fully expected
to find here.”

“Tommie?” suggested Lady Lydiard, still watching her nephew as
maliciously as ever.

“That’s it!” cried Felix, seizing his excuse, and rallying his spirits.
“Why don’t I hear Tommie snarling behind me; why don’t I feel Tommie’s
teeth in my trousers?”

The smile vanished from Lady Lydiard’s face; the tone taken by her
nephew in speaking of her dog was disrespectful in the extreme.
She showed him plainly that she disapproved of it. Felix went on,
nevertheless, impenetrable to reproof of the silent sort. “Dear little
Tommie! So delightfully fat; and such an infernal temper! I don’t know
whether I hate him or love him. Where is he?”

“Ill in bed,” answered her ladyship, with a gravity which startled even
Felix himself. “I wish to speak to you about Tommie. You know everybody.
Do you know of a good dog-doctor? The person I have employed so far
doesn’t at all satisfy me.”

“Professional person?” inquired Felix.

“Yes.”

“All humbugs, my dear aunt. The worse the dog gets the bigger the bill
grows, don’t you see? I have got the man for you--a gentleman. Knows
more about horses and dogs than all the veterinary surgeons put
together. We met in the boat yesterday crossing the Channel. You
know him by name, of course? Lord Rotherfield’s youngest son, Alfred
Hardyman.”

“The owner of the stud farm? The man who has bred the famous
racehorses?” cried Lady Lydiard. “My dear Felix, how can I presume to
trouble such a great personage about my dog?”

Felix burst into his genial laugh. “Never was modesty more woefully
out of place,” he rejoined. “Hardyman is dying to be presented to your
Ladyship. He has heard, like everybody, of the magnificent decorations
of this house, and he is longing to see them. His chambers are close by,
in Pall Mall. If he is at home we will have him here in five minutes.
Perhaps I had better see the dog first?”

Lady Lydiard shook her head. “Isabel says he had better not be
disturbed,” she answered. “Isabel understands him better than anybody.”

Felix lifted his lively eyebrows with a mixed expression of curiosity
and surprise. “Who is Isabel?”

Lady Lydiard was vexed with herself for carelessly mentioning Isabel’s
name in her nephew’s presence. Felix was not the sort of person whom she
was desirous of admitting to her confidence in domestic matters. “Isabel
is an addition to my household since you were here last,” she answered
shortly.

“Young and pretty?” inquired Felix. “Ah! you look serious, and you
don’t answer me. Young and pretty, evidently. Which may I see first, the
addition to your household or the addition to your picture-gallery? You
look at the picture-gallery--I am answered again.” He rose to approach
the archway, and stopped at his first step forward. “A sweet girl is a
dreadful responsibility, aunt,” he resumed, with an ironical assumption
of gravity. “Do you know, I shouldn’t be surprised if Isabel, in the
long run, cost you more than Hobbema. Who is this at the door?”

The person at the door was Robert Moody, returned from the bank. Mr.
Felix Sweetsir, being near-sighted, was obliged to fit his eye-glass in
position before he could recognize the prime minister of Lady Lydiard’s
household.

“Ha! our worthy Moody. How well he wears! Not a gray hair on his
head--and look at mine! What dye do you use, Moody? If he had my open
disposition he would tell. As it is, he looks unutterable things, and
holds his tongue. Ah! if I could only have held _my_ tongue--when I
was in the diplomatic service, you know--what a position I might have
occupied by this time! Don’t let me interrupt you, Moody, if you have
anything to say to Lady Lydiard.”

Having acknowledged Mr. Sweetsir’s lively greeting by a formal bow,
and a grave look of wonder which respectfully repelled that vivacious
gentleman’s flow of humor, Moody turned towards his mistress.

“Have you got the bank-note?” asked her Ladyship.

Moody laid the bank-note on the table.

“Am I in the way?” inquired Felix.

“No,” said his aunt. “I have a letter to write; it won’t occupy me
for more than a few minutes. You can stay here, or go and look at the
Hobbema, which you please.”

Felix made a second sauntering attempt to reach the picture-gallery.
Arrived within a few steps of the entrance, he stopped again, attracted
by an open cabinet of Italian workmanship, filled with rare old china.
Being nothing if not a cultivated amateur, Mr. Sweetsir paused to pay
his passing tribute of admiration before the contents of the cabinet.
“Charming! charming!” he said to himself, with his head twisted
appreciatively a little on one side. Lady Lydiard and Moody left him in
undisturbed enjoyment of the china, and went on with the business of the
bank-note.

“Ought we to take the number of the note, in case of accident?” asked
her Ladyship.

Moody produced a slip of paper from his waistcoat pocket. “I took the
number, my Lady, at the bank.”

“Very well. You keep it. While I am writing my letter, suppose you
direct the envelope. What is the clergyman’s name?”

Moody mentioned the name and directed the envelope. Felix, happening to
look round at Lady Lydiard and the steward while they were both engaged
in writing, returned suddenly to the table as if he had been struck by a
new idea.

“Is there a third pen?” he asked. “Why shouldn’t I write a line at once
to Hardyman, aunt? The sooner you have his opinion about Tommie the
better--don’t you think so?”

Lady Lydiard pointed to the pen tray, with a smile. To show
consideration for her dog was to seize irresistibly on the high-road
to her favor. Felix set to work on his letter, in a large scrambling
handwriting, with plenty of ink and a noisy pen. “I declare we are like
clerks in an office,” he remarked, in his cheery way. “All with our
noses to the paper, writing as if we lived by it! Here, Moody, let one
of the servants take this at once to Mr. Hardyman’s.”

The messenger was despatched. Robert returned, and waited near his
mistress, with the directed envelope in his hand. Felix sauntered back
slowly towards the picture-gallery, for the third time. In a moment more
Lady Lydiard finished her letter, and folded up the bank-note in it. She
had just taken the directed envelope from Moody, and had just placed the
letter inside it, when a scream from the inner room, in which Isabel was
nursing the sick dog, startled everybody. “My Lady! my Lady!” cried the
girl, distractedly, “Tommie is in a fit? Tommie is dying!”

Lady Lydiard dropped the unclosed envelope on the table, and ran--yes,
short as she was and fat as she was, ran--into the inner room. The two
men, left together, looked at each other.

“Moody,” said Felix, in his lazily-cynical way, “do you think if you or
I were in a fit that her Ladyship would run? Bah! these are the things
that shake one’s faith in human nature. I feel infernally seedy. That
cursed Channel passage--I tremble in my inmost stomach when I think of
it. Get me something, Moody.”

“What shall I send you, sir?” Moody asked coldly.

“Some dry curacoa and a biscuit. And let it be brought to me in the
picture-gallery. Damn the dog! I’ll go and look at Hobbema.”

This time he succeeded in reaching the archway, and disappeared behind
the curtains of the picture-gallery.




CHAPTER IV.

LEFT alone in the drawing-room, Moody looked at the unfastened envelope
on the table.

Considering the value of the inclosure, might he feel justified in
wetting the gum and securing the envelope for safety’s sake? After
thinking it over, Moody decided that he was not justified in meddling
with the letter. On reflection, her Ladyship might have changes to make
in it or might have a postscript to add to what she had already written.
Apart too, from these considerations, was it reasonable to act as if
Lady Lydiard’s house was a hotel, perpetually open to the intrusion of
strangers? Objects worth twice five hundred pounds in the aggregate were
scattered about on the tables and in the unlocked cabinets all round
him. Moody withdrew, without further hesitation, to order the light
restorative prescribed for himself by Mr. Sweetsir.

The footman who took the curacoa into the picture gallery found Felix
recumbent on a sofa, admiring the famous Hobbema.

“Don’t interrupt me,” he said peevishly, catching the servant in the act
of staring at him. “Put down the bottle and go!” Forbidden to look at
Mr. Sweetsir, the man’s eyes as he left the gallery turned wonderingly
towards the famous landscape. And what did he see? He saw one towering
big cloud in the sky that threatened rain, two withered mahogany-colored
trees sorely in want of rain, a muddy road greatly the worse for rain,
and a vagabond boy running home who was afraid of the rain. That was the
picture, to the footman’s eye. He took a gloomy view of the state of Mr.
Sweetsir’s brains on his return to the servants’ hall. “A slate loose,
poor devil!” That was the footman’s report of the brilliant Felix.

Immediately on the servant’s departure, the silence in the
picture-gallery was broken by voices penetrating into it from the
drawing-room. Felix rose to a sitting position on the sofa. He had
recognized the voice of Alfred Hardyman saying, “Don’t disturb Lady
Lydiard,” and the voice of Moody answering, “I will just knock at the
door of her Ladyship’s room, sir; you will find Mr. Sweetsir in the
picture-gallery.”

The curtains over the archway parted, and disclosed the figure of a tall
man, with a closely cropped head set a little stiffly on his shoulders.
The immovable gravity of face and manner which every Englishman seems to
acquire who lives constantly in the society of horses, was the gravity
which this gentleman displayed as he entered the picture-gallery. He was
a finely made, sinewy man, with clearly cut, regular features. If he had
not been affected with horses on the brain he would doubtless have been
personally popular with the women. As it was, the serene and hippic
gloom of the handsome horse-breeder daunted the daughters of Eve,
and they failed to make up their minds about the exact value of him,
socially considered. Alfred Hardyman was nevertheless a remarkable man
in his way. He had been offered the customary alternatives submitted
to the younger sons of the nobility--the Church or the diplomatic
service--and had refused the one and the other. “I like horses,” he
said, “and I mean to get my living out of them. Don’t talk to me about
my position in the world. Talk to my eldest brother, who gets the money
and the title.” Starting in life with these sensible views, and with a
small capital of five thousand pounds, Hardyman took his own place in
the sphere that was fitted for him. At the period of this narrative
he was already a rich man, and one of the greatest authorities on
horse-breeding in England. His prosperity made no change in him. He was
always the same grave, quiet, obstinately resolute man--true to the few
friends whom he admitted to his intimacy, and sincere to a fault in the
expression of his feelings among persons whom he distrusted or disliked.
As he entered the picture-gallery and paused for a moment looking at
Felix on the sofa, his large, cold, steady gray eyes rested on the
little man with an indifference that just verged on contempt. Felix, on
the other hand, sprang to his feet with alert politeness and greeted his
friend with exuberant cordiality.

“Dear old boy! This is so good of you,” he began. “I feel it--I do
assure you I feel it!”

“You needn’t trouble yourself to feel it,” was the quietly-ungracious
answer. “Lady Lydiard brings me here. I come to see the house--and the
dog.” He looked round the gallery in his gravely attentive way. “I don’t
understand pictures,” he remarked resignedly. “I shall go back to the
drawing-room.”

After a moment’s consideration, Felix followed him into the
drawing-room, with the air of a man who was determined not to be
repelled.

“Well?” asked Hardyman. “What is it?”

“About that matter?” Felix said, inquiringly.

“What matter?”

“Oh, you know. Will next week do?”

“Next week _won’t_ do.”

Mr. Felix Sweetsir cast one look at his friend. His friend was too
intently occupied with the decorations of the drawing-room to notice the
look.

“Will to-morrow do?” Felix resumed, after an interval.

“Yes.”

“At what time?”

“Between twelve and one in the afternoon.”

“Between twelve and one in the afternoon,” Felix repeated. He looked
again at Hardyman and took his hat. “Make my apologies to my aunt,” he
said. “You must introduce yourself to her Ladyship. I can’t wait here
any longer.” He walked out of the room, having deliberately returned the
contemptuous indifference of Hardyman by a similar indifference on his
own side, at parting.

Left by himself, Hardyman took a chair and glanced at the door which led
into the boudoir. The steward had knocked at that door, had disappeared
through it, and had not appeared again. How much longer was Lady
Lydiard’s visitor to be left unnoticed in Lady Lydiard’s house?

As the question passed through his mind the boudoir door opened. For
once in his life, Alfred Hardyman’s composure deserted him. He started
to his feet, like an ordinary mortal taken completely by surprise.

Instead of Mr. Moody, instead of Lady Lydiard, there appeared in the
open doorway a young woman in a state of embarrassment, who actually
quickened the beat of Mr. Hardyman’s heart the moment he set eyes on
her. Was the person who produced this amazing impression at first sight
a person of importance? Nothing of the sort. She was only “Isabel”
 surnamed “Miller.” Even her name had nothing in it. Only “Isabel
Miller!”

Had she any pretensions to distinction in virtue of her personal
appearance?

It is not easy to answer the question. The women (let us put the
worst judges first) had long since discovered that she wanted that
indispensable elegance of figure which is derived from slimness of
waist and length of limb. The men (who were better acquainted with the
subject) looked at her figure from their point of view; and, finding it
essentially embraceable, asked for nothing more. It might have been her
bright complexion or it might have been the bold luster of her eyes (as
the women considered it), that dazzled the lords of creation generally,
and made them all alike incompetent to discover her faults. Still,
she had compensating attractions which no severity of criticism could
dispute. Her smile, beginning at her lips, flowed brightly and instantly
over her whole face. A delicious atmosphere of health, freshness, and
good humor seemed to radiate from her wherever she went and whatever she
did. For the rest her brown hair grew low over her broad white forehead,
and was topped by a neat little lace cap with ribbons of a violet color.
A plain collar and plain cuffs encircled her smooth, round neck, and
her plump dimpled hands. Her merino dress, covering but not hiding the
charming outline of her bosom, matched the color of the cap-ribbons, and
was brightened by a white muslin apron coquettishly trimmed about the
pockets, a gift from Lady Lydiard. Blushing and smiling, she let the
door fall to behind her, and, shyly approaching the stranger, said
to him, in her small, clear voice, “If you please, sir, are you Mr.
Hardyman?”

The gravity of the great horse-breeder deserted him at her first
question. He smiled as he acknowledged that he was “Mr. Hardyman”--he
smiled as he offered her a chair.

“No, thank you, sir,” she said, with a quaintly pretty inclination of
her head. “I am only sent here to make her Ladyship’s apologies. She has
put the poor dear dog into a warm bath, and she can’t leave him. And Mr.
Moody can’t come instead of me, because I was too frightened to be of
any use, and so he had to hold the dog. That’s all. We are very anxious
sir, to know if the warm bath is the right thing. Please come into the
room and tell us.”

She led the way back to the door. Hardyman, naturally enough, was
slow to follow her. When a man is fascinated by the charm of youth and
beauty, he is in no hurry to transfer his attention to a sick animal
in a bath. Hardyman seized on the first excuse that he could devise
for keeping Isabel to himself--that is to say, for keeping her in the
drawing-room.

“I think I shall be better able to help you,” he said, “if you will tell
me something about the dog first.”

Even his accent in speaking had altered to a certain degree. The quiet,
dreary monotone in which he habitually spoke quickened a little under
his present excitement. As for Isabel, she was too deeply interested
in Tommie’s welfare to suspect that she was being made the victim of a
stratagem. She left the door and returned to Hardyman with eager eyes.
“What can I tell you, sir?” she asked innocently.

Hardyman pressed his advantage without mercy.

“You can tell me what sort of dog he is?”

“Yes, sir.”

“How old he is?”

“Yes, sir.”

“What his name is?--what his temper is?--what his illness is? what
diseases his father and mother had?--what--”

Isabel’s head began to turn giddy. “One thing at a time, sir!” she
interposed, with a gesture of entreaty. “The dog sleeps on my bed, and I
had a bad night with him, he disturbed me so, and I am afraid I am very
stupid this morning. His name is Tommie. We are obliged to call him by
it, because he won’t answer to any other than the name he had when my
Lady bought him. But we spell it with an _i e_ at the end, which makes
it less vulgar than Tommy with a _y_. I am very sorry, sir--I forget
what else you wanted to know. Please to come in here and my Lady will
tell you everything.”

She tried to get back to the door of the boudoir. Hardyman, feasting
his eyes on the pretty, changeful face that looked up at him with such
innocent confidence in his authority, drew her away from the door by the
one means at his disposal. He returned to his questions about Tommie.

“Wait a little, please. What sort of dog is he?”

Isabel turned back again from the door. To describe Tommie was a labor
of love. “He is the most beautiful dog in the world!” the girl began,
with kindling eyes. “He has the most exquisite white curly hair and two
light brown patches on his back--and, oh! _such_ lovely dark eyes!
They call him a Scotch terrier. When he is well his appetite is truly
wonderful--nothing comes amiss to him, sir, from pate de foie gras to
potatoes. He has his enemies, poor dear, though you wouldn’t think it.
People who won’t put up with being bitten by him (what shocking tempers
one does meet with, to be sure!) call him a mongrel. Isn’t it a shame?
Please come in and see him, sir; my Lady will be tired of waiting.”

Another journey to the door followed those words, checked instantly by a
serious objection.

“Stop a minute! You must tell me what his temper is, or I can do nothing
for him.”

Isabel returned once more, feeling that it was really serious this time.
Her gravity was even more charming than her gayety. As she lifted
her face to him, with large solemn eyes, expressive of her sense of
responsibility, Hardyman would have given every horse in his stables to
have had the privilege of taking her in his arms and kissing her.

“Tommie has the temper of an angel with the people he likes,” she said.
“When he bites, it generally means that he objects to strangers. He
loves my Lady, and he loves Mr. Moody, and he loves me, and--and I think
that’s all. This way, sir, if you please, I am sure I heard my Lady
call.”

“No,” said Hardyman, in his immovably obstinate way. “Nobody called.
About this dog’s temper? Doesn’t he take to any strangers? What sort of
people does he bite in general?”

Isabel’s pretty lips began to curl upward at the corners in a quaint
smile. Hardyman’s last imbecile question had opened her eyes to the
true state of the case. Still, Tommie’s future was in this strange
gentleman’s hands; she felt bound to consider that. And, moreover, it
was no everyday event, in Isabel’s experience, to fascinate a famous
personage, who was also a magnificent and perfectly dressed man. She ran
the risk of wasting another minute or two, and went on with the memoirs
of Tommie.

“I must own, sir,” she resumed, “that he behaves a little
ungratefully--even to strangers who take an interest in him. When he
gets lost in the streets (which is very often), he sits down on the
pavement and howls till he collects a pitying crowd round him; and when
they try to read his name and address on his collar he snaps at them.
The servants generally find him and bring him back; and as soon as he
gets home he turns round on the doorstep and snaps at the servants. I
think it must be his fun. You should see him sitting up in his chair at
dinner-time, waiting to be helped, with his fore paws on the edge of the
table, like the hands of a gentleman at a public dinner making a speech.
But, oh!” cried Isabel, checking herself, with the tears in her eyes,
“how can I talk of him in this way when he is so dreadfully ill! Some of
them say it’s bronchitis, and some say it’s his liver. Only yesterday I
took him to the front door to give him a little air, and he stood still
on the pavement, quite stupefied. For the first time in his life, he
snapped at nobody who went by; and, oh, dear, he hadn’t even the heart
to smell a lamp-post!”

Isabel had barely stated this last afflicting circumstance when
the memoirs of Tommie were suddenly cut short by the voice of Lady
Lydiard--really calling this time--from the inner room.

“Isabel! Isabel!” cried her Ladyship, “what are you about?”

Isabel ran to the door of the boudoir and threw it open. “Go in, sir!
Pray go in!” she said.

“Without you?” Hardyman asked.

“I will follow you, sir. I have something to do for her Ladyship first.”

She still held the door open, and pointed entreatingly to the passage
which led to the boudoir “I shall be blamed, sir,” she said, “if you
don’t go in.”

This statement of the case left Hardyman no alternative. He presented
himself to Lady Lydiard without another moment of delay.

Having closed the drawing-room door on him, Isabel waited a little,
absorbed in her own thoughts.

She was now perfectly well aware of the effect which she had produced
on Hardyman. Her vanity, it is not to be denied, was flattered by his
admiration--he was so grand and so tall, and he had such fine large
eyes. The girl looked prettier than ever as she stood with her head
down and her color heightened, smiling to herself. A clock on the
chimney-piece striking the half-hour roused her. She cast one look at
the glass, as she passed it, and went to the table at which Lady Lydiard
had been writing.

Methodical Mr. Moody, in submitting to be employed as bath-attendant
upon Tommie, had not forgotten the interests of his mistress. He
reminded her Ladyship that she had left her letter, with a bank-note
inclosed in it, unsealed. Absorbed in the dog, Lady Lydiard answered,
“Isabel is doing nothing, let Isabel seal it. Show Mr. Hardyman in
here,” she continued, turning to Isabel, “and then seal a letter of
mine which you will find on the table.” “And when you have sealed it,”
 careful Mr. Moody added, “put it back on the table; I will take charge
of it when her Ladyship has done with me.”

Such were the special instructions which now detained Isabel in the
drawing-room. She lighted the taper, and closed and sealed the open
envelope, without feeling curiosity enough even to look at the address.
Mr. Hardyman was the uppermost subject in her thoughts. Leaving the
sealed letter on the table, she returned to the fireplace, and studied
her own charming face attentively in the looking-glass. The time
passed--and Isabel’s reflection was still the subject of Isabel’s
contemplation. “He must see many beautiful ladies,” she thought,
veering backward and forward between pride and humility. “I wonder what
he sees in Me?”

The clock struck the hour. Almost at the same moment the boudoir-door
opened, and Robert Moody, released at last from attendance on Tommie,
entered the drawing-room.




CHAPTER V.

“WELL?” asked Isabel eagerly, “what does Mr. Hardyman say? Does he think
he can cure Tommie?”

Moody answered a little coldly and stiffly. His dark, deeply-set eyes
rested on Isabel with an uneasy look.

“Mr. Hardyman seems to understand animals,” he said. “He lifted the
dog’s eyelid and looked at his eyes, and then he told us the bath was
useless.”

“Go on!” said Isabel impatiently. “He did something, I suppose, besides
telling you that the bath was useless?”

“He took a knife out of his pocket, with a lancet in it.”

Isabel clasped her hands with a faint cry of horror. “Oh, Mr. Moody! did
he hurt Tommie?”

“Hurt him?” Moody repeated, indignant at the interest which she felt in
the animal, and the indifference which she exhibited towards the man
(as represented by himself). “Hurt him, indeed! Mr. Hardyman bled the
brute--”

“Brute?” Isabel reiterated, with flashing eyes. “I know some people, Mr.
Moody, who really deserve to be called by that horrid word. If you can’t
say ‘Tommie,’ when you speak of him in my presence, be so good as to say
‘the dog.’”

Moody yielded with the worst possible grace. “Oh, very well! Mr.
Hardyman bled the dog, and brought him to his senses directly. I am
charged to tell you--” He stopped, as if the message which he was
instructed to deliver was in the last degree distasteful to him.

“Well, what were you charged to tell me?”

“I was to say that Mr. Hardyman will give you instructions how to treat
the dog for the future.”

Isabel hastened to the door, eager to receive her instructions. Moody
stopped her before she could open it.

“You are in a great hurry to get to Mr. Hardyman,” he remarked.

Isabel looked back at him in surprise. “You said just now that Mr.
Hardyman was waiting to tell me how to nurse Tommie.”

“Let him wait,” Moody rejoined sternly. “When I left him, he was
sufficiently occupied in expressing his favorable opinion of you to her
Ladyship.”

The steward’s pale face turned paler still as he said those words.
With the arrival of Isabel in Lady Lydiard’s house “his time had
come”--exactly as the women in the servants’ hall had predicted. At last
the impenetrable man felt the influence of the sex; at last he knew the
passion of love misplaced, ill-starred, hopeless love, for a woman who
was young enough to be his child. He had already spoken to Isabel
more than once in terms which told his secret plainly enough. But the
smouldering fire of jealousy in the man, fanned into flame by Hardyman,
now showed itself for the first time. His looks, even more than his
words, would have warned a woman with any knowledge of the natures of
men to be careful how she answered him. Young, giddy, and inexperienced,
Isabel followed the flippant impulse of the moment, without a thought
of the consequences. “I’m sure it’s very kind of Mr. Hardyman to speak
favorably of me,” she said, with a pert little laugh. “I hope you are
not jealous of him, Mr. Moody?”

Moody was in no humor to make allowances for the unbridled gayety of
youth and good spirits.

“I hate any man who admires you,” he burst out passionately, “let him be
who he may!”

Isabel looked at her strange lover with unaffected astonishment. How
unlike Mr. Hardyman, who had treated her as a lady from first to last!
“What an odd man you are!” she said. “You can’t take a joke. I’m sure I
didn’t mean to offend you.”

“You don’t offend me--you do worse, you distress me.”

Isabel’s color began to rise. The merriment died out of her face; she
looked at Moody gravely. “I don’t like to be accused of distressing
people when I don’t deserve it,” she said. “I had better leave you. Let
me by, if you please.”

Having committed one error in offending her, Moody committed another in
attempting to make his peace with her. Acting under the fear that she
would really leave him, he took her roughly by the arm.

“You are always trying to get away from me,” he said. “I wish I knew how
to make you like me, Isabel.”

“I don’t allow you to call me Isabel!” she retorted, struggling to free
herself from his hold. “Let go of my arm. You hurt me.”

Moody dropped her arm with a bitter sigh. “I don’t know how to deal with
you,” he said simply. “Have some pity on me!”

If the steward had known anything of women (at Isabel’s age) he would
never have appealed to her mercy in those plain terms, and at the
unpropitious moment. “Pity you?” she repeated contemptuously. “Is that
all you have to say to me after hurting my arm? What a bear you are!”
 She shrugged her shoulders and put her hands coquettishly into the
pockets of her apron. That was how she pitied him! His face turned paler
and paler--he writhed under it.

“For God’s sake, don’t turn everything I say to you into ridicule!” he
cried. “You know I love you with all my heart and soul. Again and again
I have asked you to be my wife--and you laugh at me as if it was a joke.
I haven’t deserved to be treated in that cruel way. It maddens me--I
can’t endure it!”

Isabel looked down on the floor, and followed the lines in the pattern
of the carpet with the end of her smart little shoe. She could hardly
have been further away from really understanding Moody if he had spoken
in Hebrew. She was partly startled, partly puzzled, by the strong
emotions which she had unconsciously called into being. “Oh dear
me!” she said, “why can’t you talk of something else? Why can’t we be
friends? Excuse me for mentioning it,” she went on, looking up at him
with a saucy smile, “you are old enough to be my father.”

Moody’s head sank on his breast. “I own it,” he answered humbly. “But
there is something to be said for me. Men as old as I am have made good
husbands before now. I would devote my whole life to make you happy.
There isn’t a wish you could form which I wouldn’t be proud to obey. You
must not reckon me by years. My youth has not been wasted in a profligate
life; I can be truer to you and fonder of you than many a younger man.
Surely my heart is not quite unworthy of you, when it is all yours.
I have lived such a lonely, miserable life--and you might so easily
brighten it. You are kind to everybody else, Isabel. Tell me, dear, why
are you so hard on _me?_”

His voice trembled as he appealed to her in those simple words. He had
taken the right way at last to produce an impression on her. She really
felt for him. All that was true and tender in her nature began to rise
in her and take his part. Unhappily, he felt too deeply and too strongly
to be patient, and give her time. He completely misinterpreted her
silence--completely mistook the motive that made her turn aside for a
moment, to gather composure enough to speak to him. “Ah!” he burst out
bitterly, turning away on his side, “you have no heart.”

She instantly resented those unjust words. At that moment they wounded
her to the quick.

“You know best,” she said. “I have no doubt you are right. Remember one
thing, however, that though I have no heart, I have never encouraged
you, Mr. Moody. I have declared over and over again that I could only
be your friend. Understand that for the future, if you please. There are
plenty of nice women who will be glad to marry you, I have no doubt.
You will always have my best wishes for your welfare. Good-morning.
Her Ladyship will wonder what has become of me. Be so kind as to let me
pass.”

Tortured by the passion that consumed him, Moody obstinately kept his
place between Isabel and the door. The unworthy suspicion of her, which
had been in his mind all through the interview, now forced its way
outwards to expression at last.

“No woman ever used a man as you use me without some reason for it,” he
said. “You have kept your secret wonderfully well--but sooner or later
all secrets get found out. I know what is in your mind as well as you
know it yourself. You are in love with some other man.”

Isabel’s face flushed deeply; the defensive pride of her sex was up
in arms in an instant. She cast one disdainful look at Moody, without
troubling herself to express her contempt in words. “Stand out of my
way, sir!”--that was all she said to him.

“You are in love with some other man,” he reiterated passionately. “Deny
it if you can!”

“Deny it?” she repeated, with flashing eyes. “What right have you to ask
the question? Am I not free to do as I please?”

He stood looking at her, meditating his next words with a sudden and
sinister change to self-restraint. Suppressed rage was in his rigidly
set eyes, suppressed rage was in his trembling hand as he raised it
emphatically while he spoke his next words.

“I have one thing more to say,” he answered, “and then I have done. If
I am not your husband, no other man shall be. Look well to it, Isabel
Miller. If there _is_ another man between us, I can tell him this--he
shall find it no easy matter to rob me of you!”

She started, and turned pale--but it was only for a moment. The high
spirit that was in her rose brightly in her eyes, and faced him without
shrinking.

“Threats?” she said, with quiet contempt. “When you make love, Mr.
Moody, you take strange ways of doing it. My conscience is easy. You may
try to frighten me, but you will not succeed. When you have recovered
your temper I will accept your excuses.” She paused, and pointed to the
table. “There is the letter that you told me to leave for you when I
had sealed it,” she went on. “I suppose you have her Ladyship’s orders.
Isn’t it time you began to think of obeying them?”

The contemptuous composure of her tone and manner seemed to act on Moody
with crushing effect. Without a word of answer, the unfortunate steward
took up the letter from the table. Without a word of answer, he walked
mechanically to the great door which opened on the staircase--turned on
the threshold to look at Isabel--waited a moment, pale and still--and
suddenly left the room.

That silent departure, that hopeless submission, impressed Isabel in
spite of herself. The sustaining sense of injury and insult sank, as it
were, from under her the moment she was alone. He had not been gone a
minute before she began to be sorry for him once more. The interview had
taught her nothing. She was neither old enough nor experienced enough
to understand the overwhelming revolution produced in a man’s character
when he feels the passion of love for the first time in the maturity of
his life. If Moody had stolen a kiss at the first opportunity, she would
have resented the liberty he had taken with her; but she would have
thoroughly understood him. His terrible earnestness, his overpowering
agitation, his abrupt violence--all these evidences of a passion that
was a mystery to himself--simply puzzled her. “I’m sure I didn’t wish to
hurt his feelings” (such was the form that her reflections took, in her
present penitent frame of mind); “but why did he provoke me? It is a
shame to tell me that I love some other man--when there is no other man.
I declare I begin to hate the men, if they are all like Mr. Moody. I
wonder whether he will forgive me when he sees me again? I’m sure I’m
willing to forget and forgive on my side--especially if he won’t insist
on my being fond of him because he is fond of me. Oh, dear! I wish he
would come back and shake hands. It’s enough to try the patience of a
saint to be treated in this way. I wish I was ugly! The ugly ones have
a quiet time of it--the men let them be. Mr. Moody! Mr. Moody!” She went
out to the landing and called to him softly. There was no answer. He was
no longer in the house. She stood still for a moment in silent vexation.
“I’ll go to Tommie!” she decided. “I’m sure he’s the more agreeable
company of the two. And--oh, good gracious! there’s Mr. Hardyman waiting
to give me my instructions! How do I look, I wonder?”

She consulted the glass once more--gave one or two corrective touches to
her hair and her cap--and hastened into the boudoir.




CHAPTER VI.

FOR a quarter of an hour the drawing-room remained empty. At the end of
that time the council in the boudoir broke up. Lady Lydiard led the way
back into the drawing-room, followed by Hardyman, Isabel being left to
look after the dog. Before the door closed behind him, Hardyman turned
round to reiterate his last medical directions--or, in plainer words, to
take a last look at Isabel.

“Plenty of water, Miss Isabel, for the dog to lap, and a little bread or
biscuit, if he wants something to eat. Nothing more, if you please, till
I see him to-morrow.”

“Thank you, sir. I will take the greatest care--”

At that point Lady Lydiard cut short the interchange of instructions
and civilities. “Shut the door, if you please, Mr. Hardyman. I feel the
draught. Many thanks! I am really at a loss to tell you how gratefully I
feel your kindness. But for you my poor little dog might be dead by this
time.”

Hardyman answered, in the quiet melancholy monotone which was habitual
with him, “Your Ladyship need feel no further anxiety about the dog.
Only be careful not to overfeed him. He will do very well under Miss
Isabel’s care. By the bye, her family name is Miller--is it not? Is she
related to the Warwickshire Millers of Duxborough House?”

Lady Lydiard looked at him with an expression of satirical surprise.
“Mr. Hardyman,” she said, “this makes the fourth time you have
questioned me about Isabel. You seem to take a great interest in my
little companion. Don’t make any apologies, pray! You pay Isabel a
compliment, and, as I am very fond of her, I am naturally gratified when
I find her admired. At the same time,” she added, with one of her abrupt
transitions of language, “I had my eye on you, and I had my eye on her,
when you were talking in the next room; and I don’t mean to let you make
a fool of the girl. She is not in your line of life, and the sooner you
know it the better. You make me laugh when you ask if she is related to
gentlefolks. She is the orphan daughter of a chemist in the country. Her
relations haven’t a penny to bless themselves with, except an old aunt,
who lives in a village on two or three hundred a year. I heard of the
girl by accident. When she lost her father and mother, her aunt offered
to take her. Isabel said, ‘No, thank you; I will not be a burden on
a relation who has only enough for herself. A girl can earn an honest
living if she tries; and I mean to try’--that’s what she said. I admired
her independence,” her Ladyship proceeded, ascending again to the higher
regions of thought and expression. “My niece’s marriage, just at that
time, had left me alone in this great house. I proposed to Isabel to
come to me as companion and reader for a few weeks, and to decide for
herself whether she liked the life or not. We have never been separated
since that time. I could hardly be fonder of her if she were my own
daughter; and she returns my affection with all her heart. She has
excellent qualities--prudent, cheerful, sweet-tempered; with good sense
enough to understand what her place is in the world, as distinguished
from her place in my regard. I have taken care, for her own sake, never
to leave that part of the question in any doubt. It would be cruel
kindness to deceive her as to her future position when she marries. I
shall take good care that the man who pays his addresses to her is a man
in her rank of life. I know but too well, in the case of one of my own
relatives, what miseries unequal marriages bring with them. Excuse me
for troubling you at this length on domestic matters. I am very fond
of Isabel; and a girl’s head is so easily turned. Now you know what her
position really is, you will also know what limits there must be to the
expression of your interest in her. I am sure we understand each other;
and I say no more.”

Hardyman listened to this long harangue with the immovable gravity which
was part of his character--except when Isabel had taken him by surprise.
When her Ladyship gave him the opportunity of speaking on his side,
he had very little to say, and that little did not suggest that he had
greatly profited by what he had heard. His mind had been full of Isabel
when Lady Lydiard began, and it remained just as full of her, in just
the same way, when Lady Lydiard had done.

“Yes,” he remarked quietly, “Miss Isabel is an uncommonly nice girl, as
you say. Very pretty, and such frank, unaffected manners. I don’t deny
that I feel an interest in her. The young ladies one meets in society
are not much to my taste. Miss Isabel is my taste.”

Lady Lydiard’s face assumed a look of blank dismay. “I am afraid I have
failed to convey my exact meaning to you,” she said.

Hardyman gravely declared that he understood her perfectly. “Perfectly!”
 he repeated, with his impenetrable obstinacy. “Your Ladyship exactly
expresses my opinion of Miss Isabel. Prudent, and cheerful, and
sweet-tempered, as you say--all the qualities in a woman that I admire.
With good looks, too--of course, with good looks. She will be a perfect
treasure (as you remarked just now) to the man who marries her. I may
claim to know something about it. I have twice narrowly escaped being
married myself; and, though I can’t exactly explain it, I’m all the
harder to please in consequence. Miss Isabel pleases me. I think I
have said that before? Pardon me for saying it again. I’ll call again
to-morrow morning and look at the dog as early as eleven o’clock, if you
will allow me. Later in the day I must be off to France to attend a sale
of horses. Glad to have been of any use to your Ladyship, I am sure.
Good-morning.”

Lady Lydiard let him go, wisely resigning any further attempt to
establish an understanding between her visitor and herself.

“He is either a person of very limited intelligence when he is away from
his stables,” she thought, “or he deliberately declines to take a plain
hint when it is given to him. I can’t drop his acquaintance, on Tommie’s
account. The only other alternative is to keep Isabel out of his way. My
good little girl shall not drift into a false position while I am living
to look after her. When Mr. Hardyman calls to-morrow she shall be out
on an errand. When he calls the next time she shall be upstairs with a
headache. And if he tries it again she shall be away at my house in the
country. If he makes any remarks on her absence--well, he will find that
I can be just as dull of understanding as he is when the occasion calls
for it.”

Having arrived at this satisfactory solution of the difficulty, Lady
Lydiard became conscious of an irresistible impulse to summon Isabel to
her presence and caress her. In the nature of a warm-hearted woman,
this was only the inevitable reaction which followed the subsidence of
anxiety about the girl, after her own resolution had set that anxiety at
rest. She threw open the door and made one of her sudden appearances at
the boudoir. Even in the fervent outpouring of her affection, there was
still the inherent abruptness of manner which so strongly marked Lady
Lydiard’s character in all the relations of life.

“Did I give you a kiss, this morning?” she asked, when Isabel rose to
receive her.

“Yes, my Lady,” said the girl, with her charming smile.

“Come, then, and give me a kiss in return. Do you love me? Very well,
then, treat me like your mother. Never mind ‘my lady’ this time. Give me
a good hug!”

Something in those homely words, or something perhaps in the look that
accompanied them, touched sympathies in Isabel which seldom showed
themselves on the surface. Her smiling lips trembled, the bright tears
rose in her eyes. “You are too good to me,” she murmured, with her head
on Lady Lydiard’s bosom. “How can I ever love you enough in return?”

Lady Lydiard patted the pretty head that rested on her with such filial
tenderness. “There! there!” she said, “Go back and play with Tommie, my
dear. We may be as fond of each other as we like; but we mustn’t cry.
God bless you! Go away--go away!”

She turned aside quickly; her own eyes were moistening, and it was part
of her character to be reluctant to let Isabel see it. “Why have I made
a fool of myself?” she wondered, as she approached the drawing-room
door. “It doesn’t matter. I am all the better for it. Odd, that Mr.
Hardyman should have made me feel fonder of Isabel than ever!”

With those reflections she re-entered the drawing-room--and suddenly
checked herself with a start. “Good Heavens!” she exclaimed irritably,
“how you frightened me! Why was I not told you were here?”

Having left the drawing-room in a state of solitude, Lady Lydiard on her
return found herself suddenly confronted with a gentleman, mysteriously
planted on the hearth-rug in her absence. The new visitor may be rightly
described as a gray man. He had gray hair, eyebrows, and whiskers; he
wore a gray coat, waistcoat, and trousers, and gray gloves. For
the rest, his appearance was eminently suggestive of wealth and
respectability and, in this case, appearances were really to be trusted.
The gray man was no other than Lady Lydiard’s legal adviser, Mr. Troy.

“I regret, my Lady, that I should have been so unfortunate as to startle
you,” he said, with a certain underlying embarrassment in his manner.
“I had the honor of sending word by Mr. Moody that I would call at this
hour, on some matters of business connected with your Ladyship’s house
property. I presumed that you expected to find me here, waiting your
pleasure--”

Thus far Lady Lydiard had listened to her legal adviser, fixing her eyes
on his face in her usually frank, straightforward way. She now stopped
him in the middle of a sentence, with a change of expression in her own
face which was undisguisedly a change to alarm.

“Don’t apologize, Mr. Troy,” she said. “I am to blame for forgetting
your appointment and for not keeping my nerves under proper control.”
 She paused for a moment and took a seat before she said her next words.
“May I ask,” she resumed, “if there is something unpleasant in the
business that brings you here?”

“Nothing whatever, my Lady; mere formalities, which can wait till
to-morrow or next day, if you wish it.”

Lady Lydiard’s fingers drummed impatiently on the table. “You have known
me long enough, Mr. Troy, to know that I cannot endure suspense. You
_have_ something unpleasant to tell me.”

The lawyer respectfully remonstrated. “Really, Lady Lydiard!--” he
began.

“It won’t do, Mr. Troy! I know how you look at me on ordinary occasions,
and I see how you look at me now. You are a very clever lawyer; but,
happily for the interests that I commit to your charge, you are also a
thoroughly honest man. After twenty years’ experience of you, you can’t
deceive _me_. You bring me bad news. Speak at once, sir, and speak
plainly.”

Mr. Troy yielded--inch by inch, as it were. “I bring news which, I fear,
may annoy your Ladyship.” He paused, and advanced another inch. “It is
news which I only became acquainted with myself on entering this house.”

He waited again, and made another advance. “I happened to meet your
Ladyship’s steward, Mr. Moody, in the hall--”

“Where is he?” Lady Lydiard interposed angrily. “I can make _him_ speak
out, and I will. Send him here instantly.”

The lawyer made a last effort to hold off the coming disclosure a little
longer. “Mr. Moody will be here directly,” he said. “Mr. Moody requested
me to prepare your Ladyship--”

“Will you ring the bell, Mr. Troy, or must I?”

Moody had evidently been waiting outside while the lawyer spoke for him.
He saved Mr. Troy the trouble of ringing the bell by presenting himself
in the drawing-room. Lady Lydiard’s eyes searched his face as he
approached. Her bright complexion faded suddenly. Not a word more passed
her lips. She looked, and waited.

In silence on his part, Moody laid an open sheet of paper on the table.
The paper quivered in his trembling hand.

Lady Lydiard recovered herself first. “Is that for me?” she asked.

“Yes, my Lady.”

She took up the paper without an instant’s hesitation. Both the men
watched her anxiously as she read it.

The handwriting was strange to her. The words were these:--

“I hereby certify that the bearer of these lines, Robert Moody by name,
has presented to me the letter with which he was charged, addressed to
myself, with the seal intact. I regret to add that there is, to say the
least of it, some mistake. The inclosure referred to by the anonymous
writer of the letter, who signs ‘a friend in need,’ has not reached me.
No five-hundred pound bank-note was in the letter when I opened it.
My wife was present when I broke the seal, and can certify to this
statement if necessary. Not knowing who my charitable correspondent is
(Mr. Moody being forbidden to give me any information), I can only take
this means of stating the case exactly as it stands, and hold myself at
the disposal of the writer of the letter. My private address is at the
head of the page.--Samuel Bradstock, Rector, St. Anne’s, Deansbury,
London.”

Lady Lydiard dropped the paper on the table. For the moment, plainly as
the Rector’s statement was expressed, she appeared to be incapable of
understanding it. “What, in God’s name, does this mean?” she asked.

The lawyer and the steward looked at each other. Which of the two was
entitled to speak first? Lady Lydiard gave them no time to decide.
“Moody,” she said sternly, “you took charge of the letter--I look to you
for an explanation.”

Moody’s dark eyes flashed. He answered Lady Lydiard without caring to
conceal that he resented the tone in which she had spoken to him.

“I undertook to deliver the letter at its address,” he said. “I found
it, sealed, on the table. Your Ladyship has the clergyman’s written
testimony that I handed it to him with the seal unbroken. I have done my
duty; and I have no explanation to offer.”

Before Lady Lydiard could speak again, Mr. Troy discreetly interfered.
He saw plainly that his experience was required to lead the
investigation in the right direction.

“Pardon me, my Lady,” he said, with that happy mixture of the positive
and the polite in his manner, of which lawyers alone possess the secret.
“There is only one way of arriving at the truth in painful matters of
this sort. We must begin at the beginning. May I venture to ask your
Ladyship a question?”

Lady Lydiard felt the composing influence of Mr. Troy. “I am at your
disposal, sir,” she said, quietly.

“Are you absolutely certain that you inclosed the bank-note in the
letter?” the lawyer asked.

“I certainly believe I inclosed it,” Lady Lydiard answered. “But I was so
alarmed at the time by the sudden illness of my dog, that I do not feel
justified in speaking positively.”

“Was anybody in the room with your Ladyship when you put the inclosure
in the letter--as you believe?”

“_I_ was in the room,” said Moody. “I can swear that I saw her Ladyship
put the bank-note in the letter, and the letter in the envelope.”

“And seal the envelope?” asked Mr. Troy.

“No, sir. Her Ladyship was called away into the next room to the dog,
before she could seal the envelope.”

Mr. Troy addressed himself once more to Lady Lydiard. “Did your Ladyship
take the letter into the next room with you?”

“I was too much alarmed to think of it, Mr. Troy. I left it here, on the
table.”

“With the envelope open?”

“Yes.”

“How long were you absent in the other room?”

“Half an hour or more.”

“Ha!” said Mr. Troy to himself. “This complicates it a little.” He
reflected for a while, and then turned again to Moody. “Did any of the
servants know of this bank-note being in her Ladyship’s possession?”

“Not one of them,” Moody answered.

“Do you suspect any of the servants?”

“Certainly not, sir.”

“Are there any workmen employed in the house?”

“No, sir.”

“Do you know of any persons who had access to the room while Lady
Lydiard was absent from it?”

“Two visitors called, sir.”

“Who were they?”

“Her Ladyship’s nephew, Mr. Felix Sweetsir, and the Honorable Alfred
Hardyman.”

Mr. Troy shook his head irritably. “I am not speaking of gentlemen of
high position and repute,” he said. “It’s absurd even to mention Mr.
Sweetsir and Mr. Hardyman. My question related to strangers who might
have obtained access to the drawing-room--people calling, with her
Ladyship’s sanction, for subscriptions, for instance; or people calling
with articles of dress or ornament to be submitted to her Ladyship’s
inspection.”

“No such persons came to the house with my knowledge,” Moody answered.

Mr. Troy suspended the investigation, and took a turn thoughtfully in
the room. The theory on which his inquiries had proceeded thus far had
failed to produce any results. His experience warned him to waste
no more time on it, and to return to the starting-point of the
investigation--in other words, to the letter. Shifting his point of
view, he turned again to Lady Lydiard, and tried his questions in a new
direction.

“Mr. Moody mentioned just now,” he said, “that your Ladyship was called
into the next room before you could seal your letter. On your return to
this room, did you seal the letter?”

“I was busy with the dog,” Lady Lydiard answered. “Isabel Miller was of
no use in the boudoir, and I told her to seal it for me.”

Mr. Troy started. The new direction in which he was pushing his
inquiries began to look like the right direction already. “Miss Isabel
Miller,” he proceeded, “has been a resident under your Ladyship’s roof
for some little time, I believe?”

“For nearly two years, Mr. Troy.”

“As your Ladyship’s companion and reader?”

“As my adopted daughter,” her Ladyship answered, with marked emphasis.

Wise Mr. Troy rightly interpreted the emphasis as a warning to him to
suspend the examination of her Ladyship, and to address to Mr. Moody the
far more serious questions which were now to come.

“Did anyone give you the letter before you left the house with it?” he
said to the steward. “Or did you take it yourself?”

“I took it myself, from the table here.”

“Was it sealed?”

“Yes.”

“Was anybody present when you took the letter from the table?”

“Miss Isabel was present.”

“Did you find her alone in the room?”

“Yes, sir.”

Lady Lydiard opened her lips to speak, and checked herself. Mr. Troy,
having cleared the ground before him, put the fatal question.

“Mr. Moody,” he said, “when Miss Isabel was instructed to seal the
letter, did she know that a bank-note was inclosed in it?”

Instead of replying, Robert drew back from the lawyer with a look of
horror. Lady Lydiard started to her feet--and checked herself again, on
the point of speaking.

“Answer him, Moody,” she said, putting a strong constraint on herself.

Robert answered very unwillingly. “I took the liberty of reminding
her ladyship that she had left her letter unsealed,” he said. “And
I mentioned as my excuse for speaking,”--he stopped, and corrected
himself--“_I believe_ I mentioned that a valuable inclosure was in the
letter.”

“You believe?” Mr. Troy repeated. “Can’t you speak more positively than
that?”

“_I_ can speak positively,” said Lady Lydiard, with her eyes on the
lawyer. “Moody did mention the inclosure in the letter--in Isabel
Miller’s hearing as well as in mine.” She paused, steadily controlling
herself. “And what of that, Mr. Troy?” she added, very quietly and
firmly.

Mr. Troy answered quietly and firmly, on his side. “I am surprised that
your Ladyship should ask the question,” he said.

“I persist in repeating the question,” Lady Lydiard rejoined. “I say
that Isabel Miller knew of the inclosure in my letter--and I ask, What
of that?”

“And I answer,” retorted the impenetrable lawyer, “that the suspicion of
theft rests on your Ladyship’s adopted daughter, and on nobody else.”

“It’s false!” cried Robert, with a burst of honest indignation. “I wish
to God I had never said a word to you about the loss of the bank-note!
Oh, my Lady! my Lady! don’t let him distress you! What does _he_ know
about it?”

“Hush!” said Lady Lydiard. “Control yourself, and hear what he has to
say.” She rested her hand on Moody’s shoulder, partly to encourage
him, partly to support herself; and, fixing her eyes again on Mr. Troy,
repeated his last words, “‘Suspicion rests on my adopted daughter, and
on nobody else.’ Why on nobody else?”

“Is your Ladyship prepared to suspect the Rector of St. Anne’s of
embezzlement, or your own relatives and equals of theft?” Mr. Troy
asked. “Does a shadow of doubt rest on the servants? Not if Mr. Moody’s
evidence is to be believed. Who, to our own certain knowledge, had
access to the letter while it was unsealed? Who was alone in the room
with it? And who knew of the inclosure in it? I leave the answer to your
Ladyship.”

“Isabel Miller is as incapable of an act of theft as I am. There is my
answer, Mr. Troy.”

The lawyer bowed resignedly, and advanced to the door.

“Am I to take your Ladyship’s generous assertion as finally disposing of
the question of the lost bank-note?” he inquired.

Lady Lydiard met the challenge without shrinking from it.

“No!” she said. “The loss of the bank-note is known out of my house.
Other persons may suspect this innocent girl as you suspect her. It is
due to Isabel’s reputation--her unstained reputation, Mr. Troy!--that
she should know what has happened, and should have an opportunity of
defending herself. She is in the next room, Moody. Bring her here.”

Robert’s courage failed him: he trembled at the bare idea of exposing
Isabel to the terrible ordeal that awaited her. “Oh, my Lady!” he
pleaded, “think again before you tell the poor girl that she is
suspected of theft. Keep it a secret from her--the shame of it will
break her heart!”

“Keep it a secret,” said Lady Lydiard, “when the Rector and the Rector’s
wife both know of it! Do you think they will let the matter rest where
it is, even if I could consent to hush it up? I must write to them;
and I can’t write anonymously after what has happened. Put yourself in
Isabel’s place, and tell me if you would thank the person who knew you
to be innocently exposed to a disgraceful suspicion, and who concealed
it from you? Go, Moody! The longer you delay, the harder it will be.”

With his head sunk on his breast, with anguish written in every line
of his face, Moody obeyed. Passing slowly down the short passage which
connected the two rooms, and still shrinking from the duty that had
been imposed on him, he paused, looking through the curtains which hung
over the entrance to the boudoir.




CHAPTER VII.

THE sight that met Moody’s view wrung him to the heart.

Isabel and the dog were at play together. Among the varied
accomplishments possessed by Tommie, the capacity to take his part at a
game of hide-and-seek was one. His playfellow for the time being put a
shawl or a handkerchief over his head, so as to prevent him from seeing,
and then hid among the furniture a pocketbook, or a cigar-case, or a
purse, or anything else that happened to be at hand, leaving the dog to
find it, with his keen sense of smell to guide him. Doubly relieved
by the fit and the bleeding, Tommie’s spirits had revived; and he
and Isabel had just begun their game when Moody looked into the room,
charged with his terrible errand. “You’re burning, Tommie, you’re
burning!” cried the girl, laughing and clapping her hands. The next
moment she happened to look round and saw Moody through the parted
curtains. His face warned her instantly that something serious had
happened. She advanced a few steps, her eyes resting on him in silent
alarm. He was himself too painfully agitated to speak. Not a word was
exchanged between Lady Lydiard and Mr. Troy in the next room. In the
complete stillness that prevailed, the dog was heard sniffing and
fidgeting about the furniture. Robert took Isabel by the hand and led
her into the drawing-room. “For God’s sake, spare her, my Lady!” he
whispered. The lawyer heard him. “No,” said Mr. Troy. “Be merciful, and
tell her the truth!”

He spoke to a woman who stood in no need of his advice. The inherent
nobility in Lady Lydiard’s nature was aroused: her great heart offered
itself patiently to any sorrow, to any sacrifice.

Putting her arm round Isabel--half caressing her, half supporting
her--Lady Lydiard accepted the whole responsibility and told the whole
truth.

Reeling under the first shock, the poor girl recovered herself with
admirable courage. She raised her head, and eyed the lawyer without
uttering a word. In its artless consciousness of innocence the look was
nothing less than sublime. Addressing herself to Mr. Troy, Lady Lydiard
pointed to Isabel. “Do you see guilt there?” she asked.

Mr. Troy made no answer. In the melancholy experience of humanity to
which his profession condemned him, he had seen conscious guilt assume
the face of innocence, and helpless innocence admit the disguise of
guilt: the keenest observation, in either case, failing completely to
detect the truth. Lady Lydiard misinterpreted his silence as expressing
the sullen self-assertion of a heartless man. She turned from him, in
contempt, and held out her hand to Isabel.

“Mr. Troy is not satisfied yet,” she said bitterly. “My love, take my
hand, and look me in the face as your equal; I know no difference of
rank at such a time as this. Before God, who hears you, are you innocent
of the theft of the bank-note?”

“Before God, who hears me,” Isabel answered, “I am innocent.”

Lady Lydiard looked once more at the lawyer, and waited to hear if he
believed _that_.

Mr. Troy took refuge in dumb diplomacy--he made a low bow. It might have
meant that he believed Isabel, or it might have meant that he modestly
withdrew his own opinion into the background. Lady Lydiard did not
condescend to inquire what it meant.

“The sooner we bring this painful scene to an end the better,” she said.
“I shall be glad to avail myself of your professional assistance, Mr.
Troy, within certain limits. Outside of my house, I beg that you will
spare no trouble in tracing the lost money to the person who has really
stolen it. Inside of my house, I must positively request that the
disappearance of the note may never be alluded to, in any way whatever,
until your inquiries have been successful in discovering the thief. In
the meanwhile, Mrs. Tollmidge and her family must not be sufferers by
my loss: I shall pay the money again.” She paused, and pressed Isabel’s
hand with affectionate fervor. “My child,” she said, “one last word to
you, and I have done. You remain here, with my trust in you, and my love
for you, absolutely unshaken. When you think of what has been said here
to-day, never forget that.”

Isabel bent her head, and kissed the kind hand that still held hers. The
high spirit that was in her, inspired by Lady Lydiard’s example, rose
equal to the dreadful situation in which she was placed.

“No, my Lady,” she said calmly and sadly; “it cannot be. What this
gentleman has said of me is not to be denied--the appearances are
against me. The letter was open, and I was alone in the room with it,
and Mr. Moody told me that a valuable inclosure was inside it. Dear and
kind mistress! I am not fit to be a member of your household, I am not
worthy to live with the honest people who serve you, while my innocence
is in doubt. It is enough for me now that _you_ don’t doubt it. I can
wait patiently, after that, for the day that gives me back my good name.
Oh, my Lady, don’t cry about it! Pray, pray don’t cry!”

Lady Lydiard’s self-control failed her for the first time. Isabel’s
courage had made Isabel dearer to her than ever. She sank into a chair,
and covered her face with her handkerchief. Mr. Troy turned aside
abruptly, and examined a Japanese vase, without any idea in his mind
of what he was looking at. Lady Lydiard had gravely misjudged him in
believing him to be a heartless man.

Isabel followed the lawyer, and touched him gently on the arm to rouse
his attention.

“I have one relation living, sir--an aunt--who will receive me if I go
to her,” she said simply. “Is there any harm in my going? Lady Lydiard
will give you the address when you want me. Spare her Ladyship, sir, all
the pain and trouble that you can.”

At last the heart that was in Mr. Troy asserted itself. “You are a
fine creature!” he said, with a burst of enthusiasm. “I agree with Lady
Lydiard--I believe you are innocent, too; and I will leave no effort
untried to find the proof of it.” He turned aside again, and had another
look at the Japanese vase.

As the lawyer withdrew himself from observation, Moody approached
Isabel.

Thus far he had stood apart, watching her and listening to her in
silence. Not a look that had crossed her face, not a word that
had fallen from her, had escaped him. Unconsciously on her side,
unconsciously on his side, she now wrought on his nature with a
purifying and ennobling influence which animated it with a new life.
All that had been selfish and violent in his passion for her left him to
return no more. The immeasurable devotion which he laid at her feet, in
the days that were yet to come--the unyielding courage which cheerfully
accepted the sacrifice of himself when events demanded it at a later
period of his life--struck root in him now. Without attempting to
conceal the tears that were falling fast over his cheeks--striving
vainly to express those new thoughts in him that were beyond the reach
of words--he stood before her the truest friend and servant that ever
woman had.

“Oh, my dear! my heart is heavy for you. Take me to serve you and help
you. Her Ladyship’s kindness will permit it, I am sure.”

He could say no more. In those simple words the cry of his heart reached
her. “Forgive me, Robert,” she answered, gratefully, “if I said anything
to pain you when we spoke together a little while since. I didn’t mean
it.” She gave him her hand, and looked timidly over her shoulder at Lady
Lydiard. “Let me go!” she said, in low, broken tones, “Let me go!”

Mr. Troy heard her, and stepped forward to interfere before Lady Lydiard
could speak. The man had recovered his self-control; the lawyer took his
place again on the scene.

“You must not leave us, my dear,” he said to Isabel, “until I have put a
question to Mr. Moody in which you are interested. Do you happen to have
the number of the lost bank-note?” he asked, turning to the steward.

Moody produced his slip of paper with the number on it. Mr. Troy made
two copies of it before he returned the paper. One copy he put in his
pocket, the other he handed to Isabel.

“Keep it carefully,” he said. “Neither you nor I know how soon it may be
of use to you.”

Receiving the copy from him, she felt mechanically in her apron for her
pocketbook. She had used it, in playing with the dog, as an object to
hide from him; but she had suffered, and was still suffering, too keenly
to be capable of the effort of remembrance. Moody, eager to help her
even in the most trifling thing, guessed what had happened. “You were
playing with Tommie,” he said; “is it in the next room?”

The dog heard his name pronounced through the open door. The next moment
he trotted into the drawing-room with Isabel’s pocketbook in his mouth.
He was a strong, well-grown Scotch terrier of the largest size, with
bright, intelligent eyes, and a coat of thick curling white hair,
diversified by two light brown patches on his back. As he reached
the middle of the room, and looked from one to another of the persons
present, the fine sympathy of his race told him that there was trouble
among his human friends. His tail dropped; he whined softly as he
approached Isabel, and laid her pocketbook at her feet.

She knelt as she picked up the pocketbook, and raised her playfellow of
happier days to take her leave of him. As the dog put his paws on her
shoulders, returning her caress, her first tears fell. “Foolish of
me,” she said, faintly, “to cry over a dog. I can’t help it. Good-by,
Tommie!”

Putting him away from her gently, she walked towards the door. The dog
instantly followed. She put him away from her, for the second time, and
left him. He was not to be denied; he followed her again, and took the
skirt of her dress in his teeth, as if to hold her back. Robert forced
the dog, growling and resisting with all his might, to let go of
the dress. “Don’t be rough with him,” said Isabel. “Put him on her
ladyship’s lap; he will be quieter there.” Robert obeyed. He whispered
to Lady Lydiard as she received the dog; she seemed to be still
incapable of speaking--she bowed her head in silent assent. Robert
hurried back to Isabel before she had passed the door. “Not alone!” he
said entreatingly. “Her Ladyship permits it, Isabel. Let me see you safe
to your aunt’s house.”

Isabel looked at him, felt for him, and yielded.

“Yes,” she answered softly; “to make amends for what I said to you when
I was thoughtless and happy!” She waited a little to compose herself
before she spoke her farewell words to Lady Lydiard. “Good-by, my Lady.
Your kindness has not been thrown away on an ungrateful girl. I love
you, and thank you, with all my heart.”

Lady Lydiard rose, placing the dog on the chair as she left it. She
seemed to have grown older by years, instead of by minutes, in the short
interval that had passed since she had hidden her face from view. “I
can’t bear it!” she cried, in husky, broken tones. “Isabel! Isabel! I
forbid you to leave me!”

But one person could venture to resist her. That person was Mr.
Troy--and Mr. Troy knew it.

“Control yourself,” he said to her in a whisper. “The girl is doing
what is best and most becoming in her position--and is doing it with
a patience and courage wonderful to see. She places herself under the
protection of her nearest relative, until her character is vindicated
and her position in your house is once more beyond a doubt. Is this a
time to throw obstacles in her way? Be worthy of yourself, Lady Lydiard
and think of the day when she will return to you without the breath of a
suspicion to rest on her!”

There was no disputing with him--he was too plainly in the right. Lady
Lydiard submitted; she concealed the torture that her own resolution
inflicted on her with an endurance which was, indeed, worthy of herself.
Taking Isabel in her arms she kissed her in a passion of sorrow and
love. “My poor dear! My own sweet girl! don’t suppose that this is a
parting kiss! I shall see you again--often and often I shall see you
again at your aunt’s!” At a sign from Mr. Troy, Robert took Isabel’s arm
in his and led her away. Tommie, watching her from his chair, lifted
his little white muzzle as his playfellow looked back on passing the
doorway. The long, melancholy, farewell howl of the dog was the last
sound Isabel Miller heard as she left the house.





PART THE SECOND.

THE DISCOVERY.

CHAPTER VIII.

ON the day after Isabel’s departure, diligent Mr. Troy set forth for the
Head Office in Whitehall to consult the police on the question of the
missing money. He had previously sent information of the robbery to
the Bank of England, and had also advertised the loss in the daily
newspapers.

The air was so pleasant, and the sun was so bright, that he determined
on proceeding to his destination on foot. He was hardly out of sight of
his own offices when he was overtaken by a friend, who was also
walking in the direction of Whitehall. This gentleman was a person
of considerable worldly wisdom and experience; he had been officially
associated with cases of striking and notorious crime, in which
Government had lent its assistance to discover and punish the criminals.
The opinion of a person in this position might be of the greatest value
to Mr. Troy, whose practice as a solicitor had thus far never brought
him into collision with thieves and mysteries. He accordingly decided,
in Isabel’s interests, on confiding to his friend the nature of his
errand to the police. Concealing the name, but concealing nothing else,
he described what had happened on the previous day at Lady Lydiard’s
house, and then put the question plainly to his companion.

“What would you do in my place?”

“In your place,” his friend answered quietly, “I should not waste time
and money in consulting the police.”

“Not consult the police!” exclaimed Mr. Troy in amazement. “Surely, I
have not made myself understood? I am going to the Head Office; and
I have got a letter of introduction to the chief inspector in the
detective department. I am afraid I omitted to mention that?”

“It doesn’t make any difference,” proceeded the other, as coolly as
ever. “You have asked for my advice, and I give you my advice. Tear
up your letter of introduction, and don’t stir a step further in the
direction of Whitehall.”

Mr. Troy began to understand. “You don’t believe in the detective
police?” he said.

“Who _can_ believe in them, who reads his newspaper and remembers
what he reads?” his friend rejoined. “Fortunately for the detective
department, the public in general forgets what it reads. Go to your
club, and look at the criminal history of our own time, recorded in the
newspapers. Every crime is more or less a mystery. You will see that
the mysteries which the police discover are, almost without exception,
mysteries made penetrable by the commonest capacity, through the
extraordinary stupidity exhibited in the means taken to hide the
crime. On the other hand, let the guilty man or woman be a resolute and
intelligent person, capable of setting his (or her) wits fairly against
the wits of the police--in other words, let the mystery really _be_
a mystery--and cite me a case if you can (a really difficult and
perplexing case) in which the criminal has not escaped. Mind! I don’t
charge the police with neglecting their work. No doubt they do their
best, and take the greatest pains in following the routine to which they
have been trained. It is their misfortune, not their fault, that there
is no man of superior intelligence among them--I mean no man who is
capable, in great emergencies, of placing himself above conventional
methods, and following a new way of his own. There have been such men in
the police--men naturally endowed with that faculty of mental analysis
which can decompose a mystery, resolve it into its component parts,
and find the clue at the bottom, no matter how remote from ordinary
observation it may be. But those men have died, or have retired. One
of them would have been invaluable to you in the case you have just
mentioned to me. As things are, unless you are wrong in believing in the
young lady’s innocence, the person who has stolen that bank-note will
be no easy person to find. In my opinion, there is only one man now in
London who is likely to be of the slightest assistance to you--and he is
not in the police.”

“Who is he?” asked Mr. Troy.

“An old rogue, who was once in your branch of the legal profession,”
 the friend answered. “You may, perhaps, remember the name: they call him
‘Old Sharon.’”

“What! The scoundrel who was struck off the Roll of Attorneys, years
since? Is he still alive?”

“Alive and prospering. He lives in a court or lane running out of Long
Acre, and he offers advice to persons interested in recovering missing
objects of any sort. Whether you have lost your wife, or lost your
cigar-case, Old Sharon is equally useful to you. He has an inbred
capacity for reading the riddle the right way in cases of mystery, great
or small. In short, he possesses exactly that analytical faculty to
which I alluded just now. I have his address at my office, if you think
it worth while to try him.”

“Who can trust such a man?” Mr. Troy objected. “He would be sure to
deceive me.”

“You are entirely mistaken. Since he was struck off the Rolls Old Sharon
has discovered that the straight way is, on the whole, the best way,
even in a man’s own interests. His consultation fee is a guinea; and he
gives a signed estimate beforehand for any supplementary expenses
that may follow. I can tell you (this is, of course, strictly between
ourselves) that the authorities at my office took his advice in a
Government case that puzzled the police. We approached him, of course,
through persons who were to be trusted to represent us, without
betraying the source from which their instructions were derived; and we
found the old rascal’s advice well worth paying for. It is quite likely
that he may not succeed so well in your case. Try the police, by all
means; and, if they fail, why, there is Sharon as a last resort.”

This arrangement commended itself to Mr. Troy’s professional caution. He
went on to Whitehall, and he tried the detective police.

They at once adopted the obvious conclusion to persons of ordinary
capacity--the conclusion that Isabel was the thief.

Acting on this conviction, the authorities sent an experienced woman
from the office to Lady Lydiard’s house, to examine the poor girl’s
clothes and ornaments before they were packed up and sent after her to
her aunt’s. The search led to nothing. The only objects of any value
that were discovered had been presents from Lady Lydiard. No jewelers’
or milliners’ bills were among the papers found in her desk. Not a sign
of secret extravagance in dress was to be seen anywhere. Defeated so
far, the police proposed next to have Isabel privately watched. There
might be a prodigal lover somewhere in the background, with ruin staring
him in the face unless he could raise five hundred pounds. Lady Lydiard
(who had only consented to the search under stress of persuasive
argument from Mr. Troy) resented this ingenious idea as an insult. She
declared that if Isabel was watched the girl should know of it instantly
from her own lips. The police listened with perfect resignation and
decorum, and politely shifted their ground. A certain suspicion (they
remarked) always rested in cases of this sort on the servants. Would
her Ladyship object to private inquiries into the characters and
proceedings of the servants? Her Ladyship instantly objected, in the
most positive terms. Thereupon the “Inspector” asked for a minute’s
private conversation with Mr. Troy. “The thief is certainly a member
of Lady Lydiard’s household,” this functionary remarked, in his
politely-positive way. “If her Ladyship persists in refusing to let us
make the necessary inquiries, our hands are tied, and the case comes
to an end through no fault of ours. If her Ladyship changes her mind,
perhaps you will drop me a line, sir, to that effect. Good-morning.”

So the experiment of consulting the police came to an untimely end.
The one result obtained was the expression of purblind opinion by the
authorities of the detective department which pointed to Isabel, or to
one of the servants, as the undiscovered thief. Thinking the matter over
in the retirement of his own office--and not forgetting his promise to
Isabel to leave no means untried of establishing her innocence--Mr. Troy
could see but one alternative left to him. He took up his pen, and wrote
to his friend at the Government office. There was nothing for it now but
to run the risk, and try Old Sharon.




CHAPTER IX.

THE next day, Mr. Troy (taking Robert Moody with him as a valuable
witness) rang the bell at the mean and dirty lodging-house in which Old
Sharon received the clients who stood in need of his advice.

They were led up stairs to a back room on the second floor of the house.
Entering the room, they discovered through a thick cloud of tobacco
smoke, a small, fat, bald-headed, dirty, old man, in an arm-chair, robed
in a tattered flannel dressing-gown, with a short pipe in his mouth, a
pug-dog on his lap, and a French novel in his hands.

“Is it business?” asked Old Sharon, speaking in a hoarse, asthmatical
voice, and fixing a pair of bright, shameless, black eyes attentively on
the two visitors.

“It _is_ business,” Mr. Troy answered, looking at the old rogue who had
disgraced an honorable profession, as he might have looked at a reptile
which had just risen rampant at his feet. “What is your fee for a
consultation?”

“You give me a guinea, and I’ll give you half an hour.” With this reply
Old Sharon held out his unwashed hand across the rickety ink-splashed
table at which he was sitting.

Mr. Troy would not have touched him with the tips of his own fingers for
a thousand pounds. He laid the guinea on the table.

Old Sharon burst into a fierce laugh--a laugh strangely accompanied by a
frowning contraction of his eyebrows, and a frightful exhibition of the
whole inside of his mouth. “I’m not clean enough for you--eh?” he said,
with an appearance of being very much amused. “There’s a dirty old man
described in this book that is a little like me.” He held up his French
novel. “Have you read it? A capital story--well put together. Ah, you
haven’t read it? You have got a pleasure to come. I say, do you mind
tobacco-smoke? I think faster while I smoke--that’s all.”

Mr. Troy’s respectable hand waved a silent permission to smoke, given
under dignified protest.

“All right,” said Old Sharon. “Now, get on.”

He laid himself back in his chair, and puffed out his smoke, with eyes
lazily half closed, like the eyes of the pug-dog on his lap. At that
moment, indeed there was a curious resemblance between the two. They
both seemed to be preparing themselves, in the same idle way, for the
same comfortable nap.

Mr. Troy stated the circumstances under which the five hundred pound
note had disappeared, in clear and consecutive narrative. When he had
done, Old Sharon suddenly opened his eyes. The pug-dog suddenly opened
his eyes. Old Sharon looked hard at Mr. Troy. The pug looked hard at Mr.
Troy. Old Sharon spoke. The pug growled.

“I know who you are--you’re a lawyer. Don’t be alarmed! I never saw
you before; and I don’t know your name. What I do know is a lawyer’s
statement of facts when I hear it. Who’s this?” Old Sharon looked
inquisitively at Moody as he put the question.

Mr. Troy introduced Moody as a competent witness, thoroughly acquainted
with the circumstances, and ready and willing to answer any questions
relating to them. Old Sharon waited a little, smoking hard and thinking
hard. “Now, then!” he burst out in his fiercely sudden way. “I’m going
to get to the root of the matter.”

He leaned forward with his elbows on the table, and began his
examination of Moody. Heartily as Mr. Troy despised and disliked the old
rogue, he listened with astonishment and admiration--literally extorted
from him by the marvelous ability with which the questions were adapted
to the end in view. In a quarter of an hour Old Sharon had extracted
from the witness everything, literally everything down to the smallest
detail, that Moody could tell him. Having now, in his own phrase,
“got to the root of the matter,” he relighted his pipe with a grunt of
satisfaction, and laid himself back in his old armchair.

“Well?” said Mr. Troy. “Have you formed your opinion?”

“Yes; I’ve formed my opinion.”

“What is it?”

Instead of replying, Old Sharon winked confidentially at Mr. Troy, and
put a question on his side.

“I say! is a ten-pound note much of an object to you?”

“It depends on what the money is wanted for,” answered Mr. Troy.

“Look here,” said Old Sharon; “I give you an opinion for your guinea;
but, mind this, it’s an opinion founded on hearsay--and you know as a
lawyer what that is worth. Venture your ten pounds--in plain English,
pay me for my time and trouble in a baffling and difficult case--and
I’ll give you an opinion founded on my own experience.”

“Explain yourself a little more clearly,” said Mr. Troy. “What do you
guarantee to tell us if we venture the ten pounds?”

“I guarantee to name the person, or the persons, on whom the suspicion
really rests. And if you employ me after that, I guarantee (before you
pay me a halfpenny more) to prove that I am right by laying my hand on
the thief.”

“Let us have the guinea opinion first,” said Mr. Troy.

Old Sharon made another frightful exhibition of the whole inside of his
mouth; his laugh was louder and fiercer than ever. “I like you!” he said
to Mr. Troy, “you are so devilish fond of your money. Lord! how rich you
must be! Now listen. Here’s the guinea opinion: Suspect, in this case,
the very last person on whom suspicion could possibly fall.”

Moody, listening attentively, started, and changed color at those last
words. Mr. Troy looked thoroughly disappointed and made no attempt to
conceal it.

“Is that all?” he asked.

“All?” retorted the cynical vagabond. “You’re a pretty lawyer! What more
can I say, when I don’t know for certain whether the witness who has
given me my information has misled me or not? Have I spoken to the girl
and formed my own opinion? No! Have I been introduced among the servants
(as errand-boy, or to clean the boots and shoes, or what not), and
have I formed my own judgement of _them?_ No! I take your opinions for
granted, and I tell you how I should set to work myself if they
were _my_ opinions too--and that’s a guinea’s-worth, a devilish good
guinea’s-worth to a rich man like you!”

Old Sharon’s logic produced a certain effect on Mr. Troy, in spite of
himself. It was smartly put from his point of view--there was no denying
that.

“Even if I consented to your proposal,” he said, “I should object to
your annoying the young lady with impertinent questions, or to your
being introduced as a spy into a respectable house.”

Old Sharon doubled his dirty fists and drummed with them on the rickety
table in a comical frenzy of impatience while Mr. Troy was speaking.

“What the devil do you know about my way of doing my business?” he burst
out when the lawyer had done. “One of us two is talking like a born
idiot--and (mind this) it isn’t me. Look here! Your young lady goes out
for a walk, and she meets with a dirty, shabby old beggar--I look like
a shabby old beggar already, don’t I? Very good. This dirty old wretch
whines and whimpers and tells a long story, and gets sixpence out of the
girl--and knows her by that time, inside and out, as well as if he had
made her--and, mark! hasn’t asked her a single question, and, instead
of annoying her, has made her happy in the performance of a charitable
action. Stop a bit! I haven’t done with you yet. Who blacks your boots
and shoes? Look here!” He pushed his pug-dog off his lap, dived under
the table, appeared again with an old boot and a bottle of blackening,
and set to work with tigerish activity. “I’m going out for a walk, you
know, and I may as well make myself smart.” With that announcement, he
began to sing over his work--a song of sentiment, popular in England in
the early part of the present century--“She’s all my fancy painted her;
she’s lovely, she’s divine; but her heart it is another’s; and it never
can be mine! Too-ral-loo-ral-loo’. I like a love-song. Brush away! brush
away! till I see my own pretty face in the blacking. Hey! Here’s a nice,
harmless, jolly old man! sings and jokes over his work, and makes the
kitchen quite cheerful. What’s that you say? He’s a stranger, and don’t
talk to him too freely. You ought to be ashamed of yourself to speak in
that way of a poor old fellow with one foot in the grave. Mrs. Cook will
give him a nice bit of dinner in the scullery; and John Footman will
look out an old coat for him. And when he’s heard everything he wants to
hear, and doesn’t come back again the next day to his work--what do they
think of it in the servants’ hall? Do they say, ‘We’ve had a spy among
us!’ Yah! you know better than that, by this time. The cheerful old
man has been run over in the street, or is down with the fever, or has
turned up his toes in the parish dead-house--that’s what they say in
the servants’ hall. Try me in your own kitchen, and see if your servants
take me for a spy. Come, come, Mr. Lawyer! out with your ten pounds, and
don’t waste any more precious time about it!”

“I will consider and let you know,” said Mr. Troy.

Old Sharon laughed more ferociously than ever, and hobbled round the
table in a great hurry to the place at which Moody was sitting. He laid
one hand on the steward’s shoulder, and pointed derisively with the
other to Mr. Troy.

“I say, Mr. Silent-man! Bet you five pounds I never hear of that lawyer
again!”

Silently attentive all through the interview (except when he was
answering questions), Moody only replied in the fewest words. “I don’t
bet,” was all he said. He showed no resentment at Sharon’s familiarity,
and he appeared to find no amusement in Sharon’s extraordinary talk.
The old vagabond seemed actually to produce a serious impression on him!
When Mr. Troy set the example of rising to go, he still kept his seat,
and looked at the lawyer as if he regretted leaving the atmosphere of
tobacco smoke reeking in the dirty room.

“Have you anything to say before we go?” Mr. Troy asked.

Moody rose slowly and looked at Old Sharon. “Not just now, sir,” he
replied, looking away again, after a moment’s reflection.

Old Sharon interpreted Moody’s look and Moody’s reply from his own
peculiar point of view. He suddenly drew the steward away into a corner
of the room.

“I say!” he began, in a whisper. “Upon your solemn word of honor, you
know--are you as rich as the lawyer there?”

“Certainly not.”

“Look here! It’s half price to a poor man. If you feel like coming back,
on your own account--five pounds will do from _you_. There! there! Think
of it!--think of it!”

“Now, then!” said Mr. Troy, waiting for his companion, with the door
open in his hand. He looked back at Sharon when Moody joined him. The
old vagabond was settled again in his armchair, with his dog in his
lap, his pipe in his mouth, and his French novel in his hand; exhibiting
exactly the picture of frowzy comfort which he had presented when his
visitors first entered the room.

“Good-day,” said Mr. Troy, with haughty condescension.

“Don’t interrupt me!” rejoined Old Sharon, absorbed in his novel.
“You’ve had your guinea’s worth. Lord! what a lovely book this is! Don’t
interrupt me!”

“Impudent scoundrel!” said Mr. Troy, when he and Moody were in the
street again. “What could my friend mean by recommending him? Fancy his
expecting me to trust him with ten pounds! I consider even the guinea
completely thrown away.”

“Begging your pardon, sir,” said Moody, “I don’t quite agree with you
there.”

“What! you don’t mean to tell me you understand that oracular sentence
of his--‘Suspect the very last person on whom suspicion could possibly
fall.’ Rubbish!”

“I don’t say I understand it, sir. I only say it has set me thinking.”

“Thinking of what? Do your suspicions point to the thief?”

“If you will please to excuse me, Mr. Troy, I should like to wait a
while before I answer that.”

Mr. Troy suddenly stood still, and eyed his companion a little
distrustfully.

“Are you going to turn detective-policeman on your own account?” he
asked.

“There’s nothing I won’t turn to, and try, to help Miss Isabel in this
matter,” Moody answered, firmly. “I have saved a few hundred pounds in
Lady Lydiard’s service, and I am ready to spend every farthing of it, if
I can only discover the thief.”

Mr. Troy walked on again. “Miss Isabel seems to have a good friend in
you,” he said. He was (perhaps unconsciously) a little offended by
the independent tone in which the steward spoke, after he had himself
engaged to take the vindication of the girl’s innocence into his own
hands.

“Miss Isabel has a devoted servant and slave in me!” Moody answered,
with passionate enthusiasm.

“Very creditable; I haven’t a word to say against it,” Mr. Troy
rejoined. “But don’t forget that the young lady has other devoted
friends besides you. I am her devoted friend, for instance--I have
promised to serve her, and I mean to keep my word. You will excuse me
for adding that my experience and discretion are quite as likely to be
useful to her as your enthusiasm. I know the world well enough to be
careful in trusting strangers. It will do you no harm, Mr. Moody, to
follow my example.”

Moody accepted his reproof with becoming patience and resignation.
“If you have anything to propose, sir, that will be of service to Miss
Isabel,” he said, “I shall be happy if I can assist you in the humblest
capacity.”

“And if not?” Mr. Troy inquired, conscious of having nothing to propose
as he asked the question.

“In that case, sir, I must take my own course, and blame nobody but
myself if it leads me astray.”

Mr. Troy said no more: he parted from Moody at the next turning.

Pursuing the subject privately in his own mind, he decided on taking
the earliest opportunity of visiting Isabel at her aunt’s house, and on
warning her, in her future intercourse with Moody, not to trust too much
to the steward’s discretion. “I haven’t a doubt,” thought the lawyer,
“of what he means to do next. The infatuated fool is going back to Old
Sharon!”




CHAPTER X.

RETURNING to his office, Mr. Troy discovered, among the correspondence
that was waiting for him, a letter from the very person whose welfare
was still the uppermost subject in his mind. Isabel Miller wrote in
these terms:

“Dear Sir--My aunt, Miss Pink, is very desirous of consulting you
professionally at the earliest opportunity. Although South Morden is
within little more than half an hour’s railway ride from London, Miss
Pink does not presume to ask you to visit her, being well aware of the
value of your time. Will you, therefore, be so kind as to let me know
when it will be convenient to you to receive my aunt at your office in
London? Believe me, dear sir, respectfully yours, ISABEL MILLER.
P.S.--I am further instructed to say that the regrettable event at Lady
Lydiard’s house is the proposed subject of the consultation. The Lawn,
South Morden. Thursday.”

Mr. Troy smiled as he read the letter. “Too formal for a young girl!” he
said to himself. “Every word of it has been dictated by Miss Pink.”
 He was not long in deciding what course he should take. There was a
pressing necessity for cautioning Isabel, and here was his opportunity.
He sent for his head clerk, and looked at his list of engagements for
the day. There was nothing set down in the book which the clerk was
not quite as well able to do as the master. Mr. Troy consulted his
railway-guide, ordered his cab, and caught the next train to South Morden.

South Morden was then (and remains to this day) one of those primitive
agricultural villages, passed over by the march of modern progress,
which are still to be found in the near neighborhood of London. Only the
slow trains stopped at the station and there was so little to do that
the station-master and his porter grew flowers on the embankment, and
trained creepers over the waiting-room window. Turning your back on the
railway, and walking along the one street of South Morden, you found
yourself in the old England of two centuries since. Gabled cottages,
with fast-closed windows; pigs and poultry in quiet possession of the
road; the venerable church surrounded by its shady burial-ground; the
grocer’s shop which sold everything, and the butcher’s shop which sold
nothing; the scarce inhabitants who liked a good look at a stranger, and
the unwashed children who were pictures of dirty health; the clash of
the iron-chained bucket in the public well, and the thump of the falling
nine-pins in the skittle-ground behind the public-house; the horse-pond
on the one bit of open ground, and the old elm-tree with the wooden seat
round it on the other--these were some of the objects that you saw, and
some of the noises that you heard in South Morden, as you passed from
one end of the village to the other.

About half a mile beyond the last of the old cottages, modern England
met you again under the form of a row of little villas, set up by an
adventurous London builder who had bought the land a bargain. Each villa
stood in its own little garden, and looked across a stony road at the
meadow lands and softly-rising wooded hills beyond. Each villa faced you
in the sunshine with the horrid glare of new red brick, and forced its
nonsensical name on your attention, traced in bright paint on the posts
of its entrance gate. Consulting the posts as he advanced, Mr. Troy
arrived in due course of time at the villa called The Lawn, which
derived its name apparently from a circular patch of grass in front of
the house. The gate resisting his efforts to open it, he rang the bell.

Admitted by a trim, clean, shy little maid-servant, Mr. Troy looked
about him in amazement. Turn which way he might, he found himself
silently confronted by posted and painted instructions to visitors,
which forbade him to do this, and commanded him to do that, at every
step of his progress from the gate to the house. On the side of the lawn
a label informed him that he was not to walk on the grass. On the other
side a painted hand pointed along a boundary-wall to an inscription
which warned him to go that way if he had business in the kitchen. On
the gravel walk at the foot of the housesteps words, neatly traced in
little white shells, reminded him not to “forget the scraper”. On the
doorstep he was informed, in letters of lead, that he was “Welcome!”
 On the mat in the passage bristly black words burst on his attention,
commanding him to “wipe his shoes.” Even the hat-stand in the hall was
not allowed to speak for itself; it had “Hats and Cloaks” inscribed on
it, and it issued its directions imperatively in the matter of your wet
umbrella--“Put it here!”

Giving the trim little servant his card, Mr. Troy was introduced to a
reception-room on the lower floor. Before he had time to look round him
the door was opened again from without, and Isabel stole into the room
on tiptoe. She looked worn and anxious. When she shook hands with the
old lawyer the charming smile that he remembered so well was gone.

“Don’t say you have seen me,” she whispered. “I am not to come into the
room till my aunt sends for me. Tell me two things before I run away
again. How is Lady Lydiard? And have you discovered the thief?”

“Lady Lydiard was well when I last saw her; and we have not yet
succeeded in discovering the thief.” Having answered the questions in
those terms, Mr. Troy decided on cautioning Isabel on the subject of
the steward while he had the chance. “One question on my side,” he said,
holding her back from the door by the arm. “Do you expect Moody to visit
you here?”

“I am _sure_ he will visit me,” Isabel answered warmly. “He has promised
to come here at my request. I never knew what a kind heart Robert Moody
had till this misfortune fell on me. My aunt, who is not easily taken
with strangers, respects and admires him. I can’t tell you how good he
was to me on the journey here--and how kindly, how nobly, he spoke to
me when we parted.” She paused, and turned her head away. The tears were
rising in her eyes. “In my situation,” she said faintly, “kindness is
very keenly felt. Don’t notice me, Mr. Troy.”

The lawyer waited a moment to let her recover herself.

“I agree entirely, my dear, in your opinion of Moody,” he said. “At the
same time, I think it right to warn you that his zeal in your service
may possibly outrun his discretion. He may feel too confidently about
penetrating the mystery of the missing money; and, unless you are on
your guard, he may raise false hopes in you when you next see him.
Listen to any advice that he may give you, by all means. But, before you
decide on being guided by his opinion, consult my older experience,
and hear what I have to say on the subject. Don’t suppose that I am
attempting to make you distrust this good friend,” he added, noticing
the look of uneasy surprise which Isabel fixed on him. “No such idea is
in my mind. I only warn you that Moody’s eagerness to be of service to
you may mislead him. You understand me.”

“Yes, sir,” replied Isabel coldly; “I understand you. Please let me go
now. My aunt will be down directly; and she must not find me here.” She
curtseyed with distant respect, and left the room.

“So much for trying to put two ideas together into a girl’s mind!”
 thought Mr. Troy, when he was alone again. “The little fool evidently
thinks I am jealous of Moody’s place in her estimation. Well! I have
done my duty--and I can do no more.”

He looked round the room. Not a chair was out of its place, not a speck
of dust was to be seen. The brightly-perfect polish of the table made
your eyes ache; the ornaments on it looked as if they had never been
touched by mortal hand; the piano was an object for distant admiration,
not an instrument to be played on; the carpet made Mr. Troy look
nervously at the soles of his shoes; and the sofa (protected by layers
of white crochet-work) said as plainly as if in words, “Sit on me if you
dare!” Mr. Troy retreated to a bookcase at the further end of the room.
The books fitted the shelves to such absolute perfection that he had
some difficulty in taking one of them out. When he had succeeded, he
found himself in possession of a volume of the History of England. On
the fly-leaf he encountered another written warning:--“This book belongs
to Miss Pink’s Academy for Young Ladies, and is not to be removed from
the library.” The date, which was added, referred to a period of ten
years since. Miss Pink now stood revealed as a retired schoolmistress,
and Mr. Troy began to understand some of the characteristic
peculiarities of that lady’s establishment which had puzzled him up to
the present time.

He had just succeeded in putting the book back again when the door
opened once more, and Isabel’s aunt entered the room.

If Miss Pink could, by any possible conjuncture of circumstances, have
disappeared mysteriously from her house and her friends, the police
would have found the greatest difficulty in composing the necessary
description of the missing lady. The acutest observer could have
discovered nothing that was noticeable or characteristic in her personal
appearance. The pen of the present writer portrays her in despair by a
series of negatives. She was not young, she was not old; she was neither
tall nor short, nor stout nor thin; nobody could call her features
attractive, and nobody could call them ugly; there was nothing in her
voice, her expression, her manner, or her dress that differed in any
appreciable degree from the voice, expression, manner, and dress of
five hundred thousand other single ladies of her age and position in
the world. If you had asked her to describe herself, she would have
answered, “I am a gentlewoman”; and if you had further inquired which
of her numerous accomplishments took highest rank in her own esteem, she
would have replied, “My powers of conversation.” For the rest, she was
Miss Pink, of South Morden; and, when that has been said, all has been
said.

“Pray be seated, sir. We have had a beautiful day, after the
long-continued wet weather. I am told that the season is very
unfavorable for wall-fruit. May I offer you some refreshment after
your journey?” In these terms and in the smoothest of voices, Miss Pink
opened the interview.

Mr. Troy made a polite reply, and added a few strictly conventional
remarks on the beauty of the neighborhood. Not even a lawyer could sit
in Miss Pink’s presence, and hear Miss Pink’s conversation, without
feeling himself called upon (in the nursery phrase) to “be on his best
behavior”.

“It is extremely kind of you, Mr. Troy, to favor me with this visit,”
 Miss Pink resumed. “I am well aware that the time of professional
gentlemen is of especial value to them; and I will therefore ask you
to excuse me if I proceed abruptly to the subject on which I desire to
consult your experience.”

Here the lady modestly smoothed out her dress over her knees, and the
lawyer made a bow. Miss Pink’s highly-trained conversation had perhaps
one fault--it was not, strictly speaking, conversation at all. In its
effect on her hearers it rather resembled the contents of a fluently
conventional letter, read aloud.

“The circumstances under which my niece Isabel has left Lady Lydiard’s
house,” Miss Pink proceeded, “are so indescribably painful--I will go
further, I will say so deeply humiliating--that I have forbidden her to
refer to them again in my presence, or to mention them in the future
to any living creature besides myself. You are acquainted with those
circumstances, Mr. Troy; and you will understand my indignation when I
first learnt that my sister’s child had been suspected of theft. I
have not the honor of being acquainted with Lady Lydiard. She is not
a Countess, I believe? Just so! Her husband was only a Baron. I am not
acquainted with Lady Lydiard; and I will not trust myself to say what I
think of her conduct to my niece.”

“Pardon me, madam,” Mr. Troy interposed. “Before you say any more about
Lady Lydiard, I really must beg leave to observe--”

“Pardon _me_,” Miss Pink rejoined. “I never form a hasty judgment. Lady
Lydiard’s conduct is beyond the reach of any defense, no matter how
ingenious it may be. You may not be aware, sir, that in receiving my
niece under her roof her Ladyship was receiving a gentlewoman by birth
as well as by education. My late lamented sister was the daughter of a
clergyman of the Church of England. I need hardly remind you that,
as such, she was a born lady. Under favoring circumstances, Isabel’s
maternal grandfather might have been Archbishop of Canterbury, and have
taken precedence of the whole House of Peers, the Princes of the blood
Royal alone excepted. I am not prepared to say that my niece is equally
well connected on her father’s side. My sister surprised--I will not add
shocked--us when she married a chemist. At the same time, a chemist
is not a tradesman. He is a gentleman at one end of the profession of
Medicine, and a titled physician is a gentleman at the other end. That
is all. In inviting Isabel to reside with her, Lady Lydiard, I repeat,
was bound to remember that she was associating herself with a young
gentlewoman. She has _not_ remembered this, which is one insult; and she
has suspected my niece of theft, which is another.”

Miss Pink paused to take breath. Mr. Troy made a second attempt to get a
hearing.

“Will you kindly permit me, madam, to say a few words?”

“No!” said Miss Pink, asserting the most immovable obstinacy under
the blandest politeness of manner. “Your time, Mr. Troy, is really too
valuable! Not even your trained intellect can excuse conduct which is
manifestly _in_excusable on the face of it. Now you know my opinion of
Lady Lydiard, you will not be surprised to hear that I decline to trust
her Ladyship. She may, or she may not, cause the necessary inquiries
to be made for the vindication of my niece’s character. In a matter so
serious as this--I may say, in a duty which I owe to the memories of
my sister and my parents--I will not leave the responsibility to Lady
Lydiard. I will take it on myself. Let me add that I am able to pay the
necessary expenses. The earlier years of my life, Mr. Troy, have been
passed in the tuition of young ladies. I have been happy in meriting the
confidence of parents; and I have been strict in observing the golden
rules of economy. On my retirement, I have been able to invest a modest,
a very modest, little fortune in the Funds. A portion of it is at the
service of my niece for the recovery of her good name; and I desire to
place the necessary investigation confidentially in your hands. You are
acquainted with the case, and the case naturally goes to you. I could
not prevail on myself--I really could not prevail on myself--to mention
it to a stranger. That is the business on which I wished to consult you.
Please say nothing more about Lady Lydiard--the subject is inexpressibly
disagreeable to me. I will only trespass on your kindness to tell me if
I have succeeded in making myself understood.”

Miss Pink leaned back in her chair, at the exact angle permitted by the
laws of propriety; rested her left elbow on the palm of her right hand,
and lightly supported her cheek with her forefinger and thumb. In this
position she waited Mr. Troy’s answer--the living picture of human
obstinacy in its most respectable form.

If Mr. Troy had not been a lawyer--in other words, if he had not been
professionally capable of persisting in his own course, in the face of
every conceivable difficulty and discouragement--Miss Pink might have
remained in undisturbed possession of her own opinions. As it was, Mr.
Troy had got his hearing at last; and no matter how obstinately she
might close her eyes to it, Miss Pink was now destined to have the other
side of the case presented to her view.

“I am sincerely obliged to you, madam, for the expression of your
confidence in me,” Mr. Troy began; “at the same time, I must beg you to
excuse me if I decline to accept your proposal.”

Miss Pink had not expected to receive such an answer as this. The
lawyer’s brief refusal surprised and annoyed her.

“Why do you decline to assist me?” she asked.

“Because,” answered Mr. Troy, “my services are already engaged, in Miss
Isabel’s interest, by a client whom I have served for more than twenty
years. My client is--”

Miss Pink anticipated the coming disclosure. “You need not trouble
yourself, sir, to mention your client’s name,” she said.

“My client,” persisted Mr. Troy, “loves Miss Isabel dearly.”

“That is a matter of opinion,” Miss Pink interposed.

“And believes in Miss Isabel’s innocence,” proceeded the irrepressible
lawyer, “as firmly as you believe in it yourself.”

Miss Pink (being human) had a temper; and Mr. Troy had found his way to
it.

“If Lady Lydiard believes in my niece’s innocence,” said Miss Pink,
suddenly sitting bolt upright in her chair, “why has my niece been
compelled, in justice to herself, to leave Lady Lydiard’s house?”

“You will admit, madam,” Mr. Troy answered cautiously, “that we are all
of us liable, in this wicked world, to be the victims of appearances.
Your niece is a victim--an innocent victim. She wisely withdraws from
Lady Lydiard’s house until appearances are proved to be false and her
position is cleared up.”

Miss Pink had her reply ready. “That is simply acknowledging, in other
words, that my niece is suspected. I am only a woman, Mr. Troy--but it
is not quite so easy to mislead me as you seem to suppose.”

Mr. Troy’s temper was admirably trained. But it began to acknowledge
that Miss Pink’s powers of irritation could sting to some purpose.

“No intention of misleading you, madam, has ever crossed my mind,” he
rejoined warmly. “As for your niece, I can tell you this. In all my
experience of Lady Lydiard, I never saw her so distressed as she was
when Miss Isabel left the house!”

“Indeed!” said Miss Pink, with an incredulous smile. “In my rank of
life, when we feel distressed about a person, we do our best to comfort
that person by a kind letter or an early visit. But then I am not a lady
of title.”

“Lady Lydiard engaged herself to call on Miss Isabel in my hearing,”
 said Mr. Troy. “Lady Lydiard is the most generous woman living!”

“Lady Lydiard is here!” cried a joyful voice on the other side of the
door.

At the same moment, Isabel burst into the room in a state of excitement
which actually ignored the formidable presence of Miss Pink. “I beg your
pardon, aunt! I was upstairs at the window, and I saw the carriage
stop at the gate. And Tommie has come, too! The darling saw me at the
window!” cried the poor girl, her eyes sparkling with delight as a
perfect explosion of barking made itself heard over the tramp of horses’
feet and the crash of carriage wheels outside.

Miss Pink rose slowly, with a dignity that looked capable of adequately
receiving--not one noble lady only, but the whole peerage of England.

“Control yourself, dear Isabel,” she said. “No well-bred young lady
permits herself to become unduly excited. Stand by my side--a little
behind me.”

Isabel obeyed. Mr. Troy kept his place, and privately enjoyed his
triumph over Miss Pink. If Lady Lydiard had been actually in league with
him, she could not have chosen a more opportune time for her visit. A
momentary interval passed. The carriage drew up at the door; the horses
trampled on the gravel; the bell rung madly; the uproar of Tommie,
released from the carriage and clamoring to be let in, redoubled its
fury. Never before had such an unruly burst of noises invaded the
tranquility of Miss Pink’s villa!




CHAPTER XI.

THE trim little maid-servant ran upstairs from her modest little
kitchen, trembling at the terrible prospect of having to open the door.
Miss Pink, deafened by the barking, had just time to say, “What a very
ill-behaved dog!” when a sound of small objects overthrown in the hall,
and a scurrying of furious claws across the oil-cloth, announced that
Tommie had invaded the house. As the servant appeared, introducing Lady
Lydiard, the dog ran in. He made one frantic leap at Isabel, which would
certainly have knocked her down but for the chair that happened to be
standing behind her. Received on her lap, the faithful creature half
smothered her with his caresses. He barked, he shrieked, in his joy at
seeing her again. He jumped off her lap and tore round and round the
room at the top of his speed; and every time he passed Miss Pink he
showed the whole range of his teeth and snarled ferociously at her
ankles. Having at last exhausted his superfluous energy, he leaped back
again on Isabel’s lap, with his tongue quivering in his open mouth--his
tail wagging softly, and his eye on Miss Pink, inquiring how she liked a
dog in her drawing-room!

“I hope my dog has not disturbed you, ma’am?” said Lady Lydiard,
advancing from the mat at the doorway, on which she had patiently waited
until the raptures of Tommie subsided into repose.

Miss Pink, trembling between terror and indignation, acknowledged Lady
Lydiard’s polite inquiry by a ceremonious bow, and an answer which
administered by implication a dignified reproof. “Your Ladyship’s dog
does not appear to be a very well-trained animal,” the ex-schoolmistress
remarked.

“Well trained?” Lady Lydiard repeated, as if the expression was
perfectly unintelligible to her. “I don’t think you have had much
experience of dogs, ma’am.” She turned to Isabel, and embraced her
tenderly. “Give me a kiss, my dear--you don’t know how wretched I have
been since you left me.” She looked back again at Miss Pink. “You are
not, perhaps, aware, ma’am, that my dog is devotedly attached to your
niece. A dog’s love has been considered by many great men (whose names
at the moment escape me) as the most touching and disinterested of
all earthly affections.” She looked the other way, and discovered the
lawyer. “How do you do, Mr. Troy? It’s a pleasant surprise to find you
here The house was so dull without Isabel that I really couldn’t put off
seeing her any longer. When you are more used to Tommie, Miss Pink,
you will understand and admire him. _You_ understand and admire him,
Isabel--don’t you? My child! you are not looking well. I shall take you
back with me, when the horses have had their rest. We shall never be
happy away from each other.”

Having expressed her sentiments, distributed her greetings, and defended
her dog--all, as it were, in one breath--Lady Lydiard sat down by
Isabel’s side, and opened a large green fan that hung at her girdle.
“You have no idea, Miss Pink, how fat people suffer in hot weather,”
 said the old lady, using her fan vigorously.

Miss Pink’s eyes dropped modestly to the ground--“fat” was such a coarse
word to use, if a lady _must_ speak of her own superfluous flesh! “May I
offer some refreshment?” Miss Pink asked, mincingly. “A cup of tea?”

Lady Lydiard shook her head.

“A glass of water?”

Lady Lydiard declined this last hospitable proposal with an exclamation
of disgust. “Have you got any beer?” she inquired.

“I beg your Ladyship’s pardon,” said Miss Pink, doubting the evidence of
her own ears. “Did you say--beer?”

Lady Lydiard gesticulated vehemently with her fan. “Yes, to be sure!
Beer! beer!”

Miss Pink rose, with a countenance expressive of genteel disgust, and
rang the bell. “I think you have beer downstairs, Susan?” she said, when
the maid appeared at the door.

“Yes, miss.”

“A glass of beer for Lady Lydiard,” said Miss Pink--under protest.

“Bring it in a jug,” shouted her Ladyship, as the maid left the room.
“I like to froth it up for myself,” she continued, addressing Miss Pink.
“Isabel sometimes does it for me, when she is at home--don’t you, my
dear?”

Miss Pink had been waiting her opportunity to assert her own claim to
the possession of her own niece, from the time when Lady Lydiard had
coolly declared her intention of taking Isabel back with her. The
opportunity now presented itself.

“Your Ladyship will pardon me,” she said, “if I remark that my niece’s
home is under my humble roof. I am properly sensible, I hope, of your
kindness to Isabel, but while she remains the object of a disgraceful
suspicion she remains with me.”

Lady Lydiard closed her fan with an angry snap.

“You are completely mistaken, Miss Pink. You may not mean it--but you
speak most unjustly if you say that your niece is an object of suspicion
to me, or to anybody in my house.”

Mr. Troy, quietly listening up to this point now interposed to stop the
discussion before it could degenerate into a personal quarrel. His keen
observation, aided by his accurate knowledge of his client’s character,
had plainly revealed to him what was passing in Lady Lydiard’s mind.
She had entered the house, feeling (perhaps unconsciously) a jealousy of
Miss Pink, as her predecessor in Isabel’s affections, and as the natural
protectress of the girl under existing circumstances. Miss Pink’s
reception of her dog had additionally irritated the old lady. She had
taken a malicious pleasure in shocking the schoolmistress’s sense
of propriety--and she was now only too ready to proceed to further
extremities on the delicate question of Isabel’s justification for
leaving her house. For Isabel’s own sake, therefore--to say nothing of
other reasons--it was urgently desirable to keep the peace between the
two ladies. With this excellent object in view, Mr. Troy seized his
opportunity of striking into the conversation for the first time.

“Pardon me, Lady Lydiard,” he said, “you are speaking of a subject which
has been already sufficiently discussed between Miss Pink and myself. I
think we shall do better not to dwell uselessly on past events, but to
direct our attention to the future. We are all equally satisfied of
the complete rectitude of Miss Isabel’s conduct, and we are all equally
interested in the vindication of her good name.”

Whether these temperate words would of themselves have exercised the
pacifying influence at which Mr. Troy aimed may be doubtful. But, as he
ceased speaking, a powerful auxiliary appeared in the shape of the beer.
Lady Lydiard seized on the jug, and filled the tumbler for herself with
an unsteady hand. Miss Pink, trembling for the integrity of her carpet,
and scandalized at seeing a peeress drinking beer like a washer-woman,
forgot the sharp answer that was just rising to her lips when the lawyer
interfered. “Small!” said Lady Lydiard, setting down the empty tumbler,
and referring to the quality of the beer. “But very pleasant and
refreshing. What’s the servant’s name? Susan? Well, Susan, I was dying
of thirst and you have saved my life. You can leave the jug--I dare say
I shall empty it before I go.”

Mr. Troy, watching Miss Pink’s face, saw that it was time to change the
subject again.

“Did you notice the old village, Lady Lydiard, on your way here?” he
asked. “The artists consider it one of the most picturesque places in
England.”

“I noticed that it was a very dirty village,” Lady Lydiard answered,
still bent on making herself disagreeable to Miss Pink. “The artists may
say what they please; I see nothing to admire in rotten cottages, and
bad drainage, and ignorant people. I suppose the neighborhood has its
advantages. It looks dull enough, to my mind.”

Isabel had hitherto modestly restricted her exertions to keeping
Tommie quiet on her lap. Like Mr. Troy, she occasionally looked at her
aunt--and she now made a timid attempt to defend the neighborhood as a
duty that she owed to Miss Pink.

“Oh, my Lady! don’t say it’s a dull neighborhood,” she pleaded. “There
are such pretty walks all round us. And, when you get to the hills, the
view is beautiful.”

Lady Lydiard’s answer to this was a little masterpiece of good-humored
contempt. She patted Isabel’s cheek, and said, “Pooh! Pooh!”

“Your Ladyship does not admire the beauties of Nature,” Miss Pink
remarked, with a compassionate smile. “As we get older, no doubt our
sight begins to fail--”

“And we leave off canting about the beauties of Nature,” added Lady
Lydiard. “I hate the country. Give me London, and the pleasures of
society.”

“Come! come! Do the country justice, Lady Lydiard!” put in peace-making
Mr. Troy. “There is plenty of society to be found out of London--as good
society as the world can show.”

“The sort of society,” added Miss Pink, “which is to be found, for
example, in this neighborhood. Her Ladyship is evidently not aware
that persons of distinction surround us, whichever way we turn. I may
instance among others, the Honorable Mr. Hardyman--”

Lady Lydiard, in the act of pouring out a second glassful of beer,
suddenly set down the jug.

“Who is that you’re talking of, Miss Pink?”

“I am talking of our neighbor, Lady Lydiard--the Honorable Mr.
Hardyman.”

“Do you mean Alfred Hardyman--the man who breeds the horses?”

“The distinguished gentleman who owns the famous stud-farm,” said Miss
Pink, correcting the bluntly-direct form in which Lady Lydiard had put
her question.

“Is he in the habit of visiting here?” the old lady inquired, with a
sudden appearance of anxiety. “Do you know him?”

“I had the honor of being introduced to Mr. Hardyman at our last flower
show,” Miss Pink replied. “He has not yet favored me with a visit.”

Lady Lydiard’s anxiety appeared to be to some extent relieved.

“I knew that Hardyman’s farm was in this county,” she said; “but I had
no notion that it was in the neighborhood of South Morden. How far away
is he--ten or a dozen miles, eh?”

“Not more than three miles,” answered Miss Pink. “We consider him quite
a near neighbor of ours.”

Renewed anxiety showed itself in Lady Lydiard. She looked round sharply
at Isabel. The girl’s head was bent so low over the rough head of the
dog that her face was almost entirely concealed from view. So far as
appearances went, she seemed to be entirely absorbed in fondling Tommie.
Lady Lydiard roused her with a tap of the green fan.

“Take Tommie out, Isabel, for a run in the garden,” she said. “He won’t
sit still much longer--and he may annoy Miss Pink. Mr. Troy, will you
kindly help Isabel to keep my ill-trained dog in order?”

Mr. Troy got on his feet, and, not very willingly, followed Isabel out
of the room. “They will quarrel now, to a dead certainty!” he thought to
himself, as he closed the door. “Have you any idea of what this means?”
 he said to his companion, as he joined her in the hall. “What has Mr.
Hardyman done to excite all this interest in him?”

Isabel’s guilty color rose. She knew perfectly well that Hardyman’s
unconcealed admiration of her was the guiding motive of Lady Lydiard’s
inquiries. If she had told the truth, Mr. Troy would have unquestionably
returned to the drawing-room, with or without an acceptable excuse
for intruding himself. But Isabel was a woman; and her answer, it is
needless to say, was “I don’t know, I’m sure.”

In the mean time, the interview between the two ladies began in a manner
which would have astonished Mr. Troy--they were both silent. For once
in her life Lady Lydiard was considering what she should say, before she
said it. Miss Pink, on her side, naturally waited to hear what object
her Ladyship had in view--waited, until her small reserve of patience
gave way. Urged by irresistible curiosity, she spoke first.

“Have you anything to say to me in private?” she asked.

Lady Lydiard had not got to the end of her reflections. She said
“Yes!”--and she said no more.

“Is it anything relating to my niece?” persisted Miss Pink.

Still immersed in her reflections, Lady Lydiard suddenly rose to the
surface, and spoke her mind, as usual.

“About your niece, ma’am. The other day Mr. Hardyman called at my house,
and saw Isabel.”

“Yes,” said Miss Pink, politely attentive, but not in the least
interested, so far.

“That’s not all ma’am. Mr. Hardyman admires Isabel; he owned it to me
himself in so many words.”

Miss Pink listened, with a courteous inclination of her head. She looked
mildly gratified, nothing more. Lady Lydiard proceeded:

“You and I think differently on many matters,” she said. “But we are
both agreed, I am sure, in feeling the sincerest interest in Isabel’s
welfare. I beg to suggest to you, Miss Pink, that Mr. Hardyman, as a
near neighbor of yours, is a very undesirable neighbor while Isabel
remains in your house.”

Saying those words, under a strong conviction of the serious importance
of the subject, Lady Lydiard insensibly recovered the manner and resumed
the language which befitted a lady of her rank. Miss Pink, noticing the
change, set it down to an expression of pride on the part of her visitor
which, in referring to Isabel, assailed indirectly the social position
of Isabel’s aunt.

“I fail entirely to understand what your Ladyship means,” she said
coldly.

Lady Lydiard, on her side, looked in undisguised amazement at Miss Pink.

“Haven’t I told you already that Mr. Hardyman admires your niece?” she
asked.

“Naturally,” said Miss Pink. “Isabel inherits her lamented mother’s
personal advantages. If Mr. Hardyman admires her, Mr. Hardyman shows his
good taste.”

Lady Lydiard’s eyes opened wider and wider in wonder. “My good lady!”
 she exclaimed, “is it possible you don’t know that when a man admires
a women he doesn’t stop there? He falls in love with her (as the saying
is) next.”

“So I have heard,” said Miss Pink.

“So you have _heard?_” repeated Lady Lydiard. “If Mr. Hardyman finds
his way to Isabel I can tell you what you will _see_. Catch the two
together, ma’am--and you will see Mr. Hardyman making love to your
niece.”

“Under due restrictions, Lady Lydiard, and with my permission first
obtained, of course, I see no objection to Mr. Hardyman paying his
addresses to Isabel.”

“The woman is mad!” cried Lady Lydiard. “Do you actually suppose, Miss
Pink, that Alfred Hardyman could, by any earthly possibility, marry your
niece!”

Not even Miss Pink’s politeness could submit to such a question as this.
She rose indignantly from her chair. “As you aware, Lady Lydiard, that
the doubt you have just expressed is an insult to my niece, and a insult
to Me?”

“Are _you_ aware of who Mr. Hardyman really is?” retorted her Ladyship.
“Or do you judge of his position by the vocation in life which he has
perversely chosen to adopt? I can tell you, if you do, that Alfred
Hardyman is the younger son of one of the oldest barons in the English
Peerage, and that his mother is related by marriage to the Royal family
of Wurtemberg.”

Miss Pink received the full shock of this information without receding
from her position by a hair-breadth.

“An English gentlewoman offers a fit alliance to any man living who
seeks her hand in marriage,” said Miss Pink. “Isabel’s mother (you may
not be aware of it) was the daughter of an English clergyman--”

“And Isabel’s father was a chemist in a country town,” added Lady
Lydiard.

“Isabel’s father,” rejoined Miss Pink, “was attached in a most
responsible capacity to the useful and honorable profession of Medicine.
Isabel is, in the strictest sense of the word, a young gentlewoman. If
you contradict that for a single instant, Lady Lydiard, you will oblige
me to leave the room.”

Those last words produced a result which Miss Pink had not
anticipated--they roused Lady Lydiard to assert herself. As usual in
such cases, she rose superior to her own eccentricity. Confronting
Miss Pink, she now spoke and looked with the gracious courtesy and the
unpresuming self-confidence of the order to which she belonged.

“For Isabel’s own sake, and for the quieting of my conscience,” she
answered, “I will say one word more, Miss Pink, before I relieve you
of my presence. Considering my age and my opportunities, I may claim
to know quite as much as you do of the laws and customs which
regulate society in our time. Without contesting your niece’s social
position--and without the slightest intention of insulting you--I repeat
that the rank which Mr. Hardyman inherits makes it simply impossible for
him even to think of marrying Isabel. You will do well not to give him
any opportunities of meeting with her alone. And you will do better
still (seeing that he is so near a neighbor of yours) if you permit
Isabel to return to my protection, for a time at least. I will wait to
hear from you when you have thought the matter over at your leisure.
In the mean time, if I have inadvertently offended you, I ask your
pardon--and I wish you good-evening.”

She bowed, and walked to the door. Miss Pink, as resolute as ever in
maintaining her pretensions, made an effort to match the great lady on
her own ground.

“Before you go, Lady Lydiard, I beg to apologize if I have spoken too
warmly on my side,” she said. “Permit me to send for your carriage.”

“Thank you, Miss Pink. My carriage is only at the village inn. I shall
enjoy a little walk in the cool evening air. Mr. Troy, I have no doubt,
will give me his arm.” She bowed once more, and quietly left the room.

Reaching the little back garden of the villa, through an open door
at the further end of the hall, Lady Lydiard found Tommie rolling
luxuriously on Miss Pink’s flower-beds, and Isabel and Mr. Troy in close
consultation on the gravel walk.

She spoke to the lawyer first.

“They are baiting the horses at the inn,” she said. “I want your arm,
Mr. Troy, as far as the village--and, in return, I will take you back
to London with me. I have to ask your advice about one or two little
matters, and this is a good opportunity.”

“With the greatest pleasure, Lady Lydiard. I suppose I must say good-by
to Miss Pink?”

“A word of advice to you, Mr. Troy. Take care how you ruffle Miss Pink’s
sense of her own importance. Another word for your private ear. Miss
Pink is a fool.”

On the lawyer’s withdrawal, Lady Lydiard put her arm fondly round
Isabel’s waist. “What were you and Mr. Troy so busy in talking about?”
 she asked.

“We were talking, my Lady, about tracing the person who stole the
money,” Isabel answered, rather sadly. “It seems a far more difficult
matter than I supposed it to be. I try not to lose patience and
hope--but it is a little hard to feel that appearances are against me,
and to wait day after day in vain for the discovery that is to set me
right.”

“You are a dear good child,” said Lady Lydiard; “and you are more
precious to me than ever. Don’t despair, Isabel. With Mr. Troy’s means
of inquiring, and with my means of paying, the discovery of the thief
cannot be much longer delayed. If you don’t return to me soon, I shall
come back and see you again. Your aunt hates the sight of me--but I
don’t care two straws for that,” remarked Lady Lydiard, showing the
undignified side of her character once more. “Listen to me, Isabel! I
have no wish to lower your aunt in your estimation, but I feel far more
confidence in your good sense than in hers. Mr. Hardyman’s business has
taken him to France for the present. It is at least possible that you
may meet with him on his return. If you do, keep him at a distance, my
dear--politely, of course. There! there! you needn’t turn red; I am not
blaming you; I am only giving you a little good advice. In your position
you cannot possibly be too careful. Here is Mr. Troy! You must come to
the gate with us, Isabel, or we shall never get Tommie away from you; I
am only his second favorite; you have the first place in his affections.
God bless and prosper you, my child!--I wish to heaven you were going
back to London with me! Well, Mr. Troy, how have you done with Miss
Pink? Have you offended that terrible ‘gentlewoman’ (hateful word!); or
has it been all the other way, and has she given you a kiss at parting?”

Mr. Troy smiled mysteriously, and changed the subject. His brief parting
interview with the lady of the house was not of a nature to be rashly
related. Miss Pink had not only positively assured him that her visitor
was the most ill-bred woman she had ever met with, but had further
accused Lady Lydiard of shaking her confidence in the aristocracy of her
native country. “For the first time in my life,” said Miss Pink, “I feel
that something is to be said for the Republican point of view; and I am
not indisposed to admit that the constitution of the United States _has_
its advantages!”




CHAPTER XII.

THE conference between Lady Lydiard and Mr. Troy, on the way back to
London, led to some practical results.

Hearing from her legal adviser that the inquiry after the missing money
was for a moment at a standstill, Lady Lydiard made one of those bold
suggestions with which she was accustomed to startle her friends in
cases of emergency. She had heard favorable reports of the extraordinary
ingenuity of the French police; and she now proposed sending to Paris
for assistance, after first consulting her nephew, Mr. Felix Sweetsir.
“Felix knows Paris as well as he knows London,” she remarked. “He is an
idle man, and it is quite likely that he will relieve us of all trouble
by taking the matter into his own hands. In any case, he is sure to know
who are the right people to address in our present necessity. What do
you say?”

Mr. Troy, in reply, expressed his doubts as to the wisdom of employing
foreigners in a delicate investigation which required an accurate
knowledge of English customs and English character. Waiving this
objection, he approved of the idea of consulting her Ladyship’s nephew.
“Mr. Sweetsir is a man of the world,” he said. “In putting the case
before him, we are sure to have it presented to us from a new point
of view.” Acting on this favorable expression of opinion, Lady Lydiard
wrote to her nephew. On the day after the visit to Miss Pink, the
proposed council of three was held at Lady Lydiard’s house.

Felix, never punctual at keeping an appointment, was even later than
usual on this occasion. He made his apologies with his hand pressed upon
his forehead, and his voice expressive of the languor and discouragement
of a suffering man.

“The beastly English climate is telling on my nerves,” said Mr.
Sweetsir--“the horrid weight of the atmosphere, after the exhilarating
air of Paris; the intolerable dirt and dullness of London, you know. I
was in bed, my dear aunt, when I received your letter. You may imagine
the completely demoralised state I was in, when I tell you of the
effect which the news of the robbery produced on me. I fell back on my
pillow, as if I had been shot. Your Ladyship should really be a
little more careful in communicating these disagreeable surprises to a
sensitively-organised man. Never mind--my valet is a perfect treasure;
he brought me some drops of ether on a lump of sugar. I said, ‘Alfred’
(his name is Alfred), ‘put me into my clothes!’ Alfred put me in. I
assure you it reminded me of my young days, when I was put into my first
pair of trousers. Has Alfred forgotten anything? Have I got my braces
on? Have I come out in my shirt-sleeves? Well, dear aunt;--well, Mr.
Troy!--what can I say? What can I do?”

Lady Lydiard, entirely without sympathy for nervous suffering, nodded to
the lawyer. “You tell him,” she said.

“I believe I speak for her Ladyship,” Mr. Troy began, “when I say that
we should like to hear, in the first place, how the whole case strikes
you, Mr. Sweetsir?”

“Tell it me all over again,” said Felix.

Patient Mr. Troy told it all over again--and waited for the result.

“Well?” said Felix.

“Well?” said Mr. Troy. “Where does the suspicion of robbery rest in your
opinion? You look at the theft of the bank-note with a fresh eye.”

“You mentioned a clergyman just now,” said Felix. “The man, you know, to
whom the money was sent. What was his name?”

“The Reverend Samuel Bradstock.”

“You want me to name the person whom I suspect?”

“Yes, if you please,” said Mr. Troy.

“I suspect the Reverend Samuel Bradstock,” said Felix.

“If you have come here to make stupid jokes,” interposed Lady Lydiard,
“you had better go back to your bed again. We want a serious opinion.”

“You _have_ a serious opinion,” Felix coolly rejoined. “I never was more
in earnest in my life. Your Ladyship is not aware of the first principle
to be adopted in cases of suspicion. One proceeds on what I will call
the exhaustive system of reasoning. Thus: Does suspicion point to the
honest servants downstairs? No. To your Ladyship’s adopted daughter?
Appearances are against the poor girl; but you know her better than to
trust to appearances. Are you suspicious of Moody? No. Of Hardyman--who
was in the house at the time? Ridiculous! But I was in the house at the
time, too. Do you suspect Me? Just so! That idea is ridiculous, too.
Now let us sum up. Servants, adopted daughter, Moody, Hardyman,
Sweetsir--all beyond suspicion. Who is left? The Reverend Samuel
Bradstock.”

This ingenious exposition of “the exhaustive system of reasoning,”
 failed to produce any effect on Lady Lydiard. “You are wasting our
time,” she said sharply. “You know as well as I do that you are talking
nonsense.”

“I don’t,” said Felix. “Taking the gentlemanly professions all round,
I know of no men who are so eager to get money, and who have so few
scruples about how they get it, as the parsons. Where is there a man in
any other profession who perpetually worries you for money?--who holds
the bag under your nose for money?--who sends his clerk round from
door to door to beg a few shillings of you, and calls it an ‘Easter
offering’? The parson does all this. Bradstock is a parson. I put it
logically. Bowl me over, if you can.”

Mr. Troy attempted to “bowl him over,” nevertheless. Lady Lydiard wisely
interposed.

“When a man persists in talking nonsense,” she said, “silence is the
best answer; anything else only encourages him.” She turned to Felix.
“I have a question to ask you,” she went on. “You will either give me
a serious reply, or wish me good-morning.” With this brief preface,
she made her inquiry as to the wisdom and possibility of engaging the
services of the French police.

Felix took exactly the view of the matter which had been already
expressed by Mr. Troy. “Superior in intelligence,” he said, “but not
superior in courage, to the English police. Capable of performing
wonders on their own ground and among their own people. But, my dear
aunt, the two most dissimilar nations on the face of the earth are the
English and the French. The French police may speak our language--but
they are incapable of understanding our national character and our
national manners. Set them to work on a private inquiry in the city of
Pekin--and they would get on in time with the Chinese people. Set them
to work in the city of London--and the English people would remain, from
first to last, the same impenetrable mystery to them. In my belief the
London Sunday would be enough of itself to drive them back to Paris
in despair. No balls, no concerts, no theaters, not even a museum or a
picture-gallery open; every shop shut up but the gin-shop; and nothing
moving but the church bells and the men who sell the penny ices.
Hundreds of Frenchmen come to see me on their first arrival in England.
Every man of them rushes back to Paris on the second Saturday of his
visit, rather than confront the horrors of a second Sunday in London!
However, you can try it if you like. Send me a written abstract of the
case, and I will forward it to one of the official people in the Rue
Jerusalem, who will do anything he can to oblige me. Of course,” said
Felix, turning to Mr. Troy, “some of you have got the number of the lost
bank-note? If the thief has tried to pass it in Paris, my man may be of
some use to you.”

“Three of us have got the number of the note,” answered Mr. Troy; “Miss
Isabel Miller, Mr. Moody, and myself.”

“Very good,” said Felix. “Send me the number, with the abstract of the
case. Is there anything else I can do towards recovering the money?”
 he asked, turning to his aunt. “There is one lucky circumstance in
connection with this loss--isn’t there? It has fallen on a person who
is rich enough to take it easy. Good heavens! suppose it had been _my_
loss!”

“It has fallen doubly on me,” said Lady Lydiard; “and I am certainly
not rich enough to take it _that_ easy. The money was destined to a
charitable purpose; and I have felt it my duty to pay it again.”

Felix rose and approached his aunt’s chair with faltering steps, as
became a suffering man. He took Lady Lydiard’s hand and kissed it with
enthusiastic admiration.

“You excellent creature!” he said. “You may not think it, but you
reconcile me to human nature. How generous! how noble! I think I’ll go
to bed again, Mr. Troy, if you really don’t want any more of me. My head
feels giddy and my legs tremble under me. It doesn’t matter; I shall
feel easier when Alfred has taken me out of my clothes again. God bless
you, my dear aunt! I never felt so proud of being related to you as I
do to-day. Good-morning Mr. Troy! Don’t forget the abstract of the case;
and don’t trouble yourself to see me to the door. I dare say I shan’t
tumble downstairs; and, if I do, there’s the porter in the hall to pick
me up again. Enviable porter! as fat as butter and as idle as a pig! _Au
revoir! au revoir!_” He kissed his hand, and drifted feebly out of
the room. Sweetsir one might say, in a state of eclipse; but still the
serviceable Sweetsir, who was never consulted in vain by the fortunate
people privileged to call him friend!

“Is he really ill, do you think?” Mr. Troy asked.

“My nephew has turned fifty,” Lady Lydiard answered, “and he persists in
living as if he was a young man. Every now and then Nature says to him,
‘Felix, you are old!’ And Felix goes to bed, and says it’s his nerves.”

“I suppose he is to be trusted to keep his word about writing to Paris?”
 pursued the lawyer.

“Oh, yes! He may delay doing it but he will do it. In spite of his
lackadaisical manner, he has moments of energy that would surprise you.
Talking of surprises, I have something to tell you about Moody. Within
the last day or two there has been a marked change in him--a change for
the worse.”

“You astonish me, Lady Lydiard! In what way has Moody deteriorated?”

“You shall hear. Yesterday was Friday. You took him out with you, on
business, early in the morning.”

Mr. Troy bowed, and said nothing. He had not thought it desirable to
mention the interview at which Old Sharon had cheated him of his guinea.

“In the course of the afternoon,” pursued Lady Lydiard, “I happened to
want him, and I was informed that Moody had gone out again. Where had he
gone? Nobody knew. Had he left word when he would be back? He had left
no message of any sort. Of course, he is not in the position of an
ordinary servant. I don’t expect him to ask permission to go out. But I
do expect him to leave word downstairs of the time at which he is likely
to return. When he did come back, after an absence of some hours, I
naturally asked for an explanation. Would you believe it? he simply
informed me that he had been away on business of his own; expressed
no regret, and offered no explanation--in short, spoke as if he was an
independent gentleman. You may not think it, but I kept my temper. I
merely remarked that I hoped it would not happen again. He made me a
bow, and he said, ‘My business is not completed yet, my Lady. I cannot
guarantee that it may not call me away again at a moment’s notice.’
What do you think of that? Nine people out of ten would have given
him warning to leave their service. I begin to think I am a wonderful
woman--I only pointed to the door. One does hear sometimes of men’s
brains softening in the most unexpected manner. I have my suspicions of
Moody’s brains, I can tell you.”

Mr. Troy’s suspicions took a different direction: they pointed along the
line of streets which led to Old Sharon’s lodgings. Discreetly silent as
to the turn which his thoughts had taken, he merely expressed himself as
feeling too much surprised to offer any opinion at all.

“Wait a little,” said Lady Lydiard, “I haven’t done surprising you yet.
You have seen a boy here in a page’s livery, I think? Well, he is a good
boy; and he has gone home for a week’s holiday with his friends. The
proper person to supply his place with the boots and shoes and other
small employments, is of course the youngest footman, a lad only a
few years older than himself. What do you think Moody does? Engages a
stranger, with the house full of idle men-servants already, to fill the
page’s place. At intervals this morning I heard them wonderfully merry
in the servants hall--_so_ merry that the noise and laughter found its
way upstairs to the breakfast-room. I like my servants to be in good
spirits; but it certainly did strike me that they were getting beyond
reasonable limits. I questioned my maid, and was informed that the noise
was all due to the jokes of the strangest old man that ever was seen.
In other words, to the person whom my steward had taken it on himself
to engage in the page’s absence. I spoke to Moody on the subject. He
answered in an odd, confused way, that he had exercised his discretion
to the best of his judgment and that (if I wished it), he would tell the
old man to keep his good spirits under better control. I asked him
how he came to hear of the man. He only answered, ‘By accident, my
Lady’--and not one more word could I get out of him, good or bad. Moody
engages the servants, as you know; but on every other occasion he has
invariably consulted me before an engagement was settled. I really don’t
feel at all sure about this person who has been so strangely introduced
into the house--he may be a drunkard or a thief. I wish you would speak
to Moody yourself, Mr. Troy. Do you mind ringing the bell?”

Mr. Troy rose, as a matter of course, and rang the bell.

He was by this time, it is needless to say, convinced that Moody had
not only gone back to consult Old Sharon on his own responsibility, but
worse still, had taken the unwarrantable liberty of introducing him, as
a spy, into the house. To communicate this explanation to Lady Lydiard
would, in her present humor, be simply to produce the dismissal of the
steward from her service. The only other alternative was to ask leave to
interrogate Moody privately, and, after duly reproving him, to insist on
the departure of Old Sharon as the one condition on which Mr. Troy would
consent to keep Lady Lydiard in ignorance of the truth.

“I think I shall manage better with Moody, if your Ladyship will permit
me to see him in private,” the lawyer said. “Shall I go downstairs and
speak with him in his own room?”

“Why should you trouble yourself to do that?” said her Ladyship. “See
him here; and I will go into the boudoir.”

As she made that reply, the footman appeared at the drawing-room door.

“Send Moody here,” said Lady Lydiard.

The footman’s answer, delivered at that moment, assumed an importance
which was not expressed in the footman’s words. “My Lady,” he said, “Mr.
Moody has gone out.”




CHAPTER XIII.

WHILE the strange proceedings of the steward were the subject of
conversation between Lady Lydiard and Mr. Troy, Moody was alone in his
room, occupied in writing to Isabel. Being unwilling that any eyes but
his own should see the address, he had himself posted his letter; the
time that he had chosen for leaving the house proving, unfortunately,
to be also the time proposed by her Ladyship for his interview with the
lawyer. In ten minutes after the footman had reported his absence, Moody
returned. It was then too late to present himself in the drawing-room.
In the interval, Mr. Troy had taken his leave, and Moody’s position had
dropped a degree lower in Lady Lydiard’s estimation.

Isabel received her letter by the next morning’s post. If any
justification of Mr. Troy’s suspicions had been needed, the terms in
which Moody wrote would have amply supplied it.


“DEAR ISABEL (I hope I may call you ‘Isabel’ without offending you, in
your present trouble?)--I have a proposal to make, which, whether
you accept it or not, I beg you will keep a secret from every living
creature but ourselves. You will understand my request, when I add that
these lines relate to the matter of tracing the stolen bank-note.

“I have been privately in communication with a person in London, who is,
as I believe, the one person competent to help us in gaining our end.
He has already made many inquiries in private. With some of them I am
acquainted; the rest he has thus far kept to himself. The person to whom
I allude, particularly wishes to have half an hour’s conversation with
you in my presence. I am bound to warn you that he is a very strange
and very ugly old man; and I can only hope that you will look over his
personal appearance in consideration of what he is likely to do for your
future advantage.

“Can you conveniently meet us, at the further end of the row of villas
in which your aunt lives, the day after to-morrow, at four o’clock? Let
me have a line to say if you will keep the appointment, and if the hour
named will suit you. And believe me your devoted friend and servant,

“ROBERT MOODY.”


The lawyer’s warning to her to be careful how she yielded too readily to
any proposal of Moody’s recurred to Isabel’s mind while she read those
lines. Being pledged to secrecy, she could not consult Mr. Troy--she was
left to decide for herself.

No obstacle stood in the way of her free choice of alternatives. After
their early dinner at three o’clock, Miss Pink habitually retired to
her own room “to meditate,” as she expressed it. Her “meditations”
 inevitably ended in a sound sleep of some hours; and during that
interval Isabel was at liberty to do as she pleased. After considerable
hesitation, her implicit belief in Moody’s truth and devotion, assisted
by a strong feeling of curiosity to see the companion with whom the
steward had associated himself, decided Isabel on consenting to keep the
appointment.

Taking up her position beyond the houses, on the day and at the hour
mentioned by Moody, she believed herself to be fully prepared for the
most unfavorable impression which the most disagreeable of all possible
strangers could produce.

But the first appearance of Old Sharon--as dirty as ever, clothed in
a long, frowzy, gray overcoat, with his pug-dog at his heels, and his
smoke-blackened pipe in his mouth, with a tan white hat on his head,
which looked as if it had been picked up in a gutter, a hideous leer
in his eyes, and a jaunty trip in his walk--took her so completely
by surprise that she could only return Moody’s friendly greeting by
silently pressing his hand. As for Moody’s companion, to look at him for
a second time was more than she had resolution to do. She kept her eyes
fixed on the pug-dog, and with good reason; as far as appearances went,
he was indisputably the nobler animal of the two.

Under the circumstances, the interview threatened to begin in a very
embarrassing manner. Moody, disheartened by Isabel’s silence, made no
attempt to set the conversation going; he looked as if he meditated
a hasty retreat to the railway station which he had just left.
Fortunately, he had at his side the right man (for once) in the right
place. Old Sharon’s effrontery was equal to any emergency.

“I am not a nice-looking old man, my dear, am I?” he said, leering at
Isabel with cunning, half-closed eyes. “Bless your heart! you’ll soon
get used to me! You see, I am the sort of color, as they say at the
linen-drapers, that doesn’t wash well. It’s all through love; upon
my life it is! Early in the present century I had my young affections
blighted; and I’ve neglected myself ever since. Disappointment takes
different forms, miss, in different men. I don’t think I have had heart
enough to brush my hair for the last fifty years. She was a magnificent
woman, Mr. Moody, and she dropped me like a hot potato. Dreadful!
dreadful! Let us pursue this painful subject no further. Ha! here’s a
pretty country! Here’s a nice blue sky! I admire the country, miss; I
see so little of it, you know. Have you any objection to walk along into
the fields? The fields, my dear, bring out all the poetry of my nature.
Where’s the dog? Here, Puggy! Puggy! hunt about, my man, and find some
dog-grass. Does his inside good, you know, after a meat diet in London.
Lord! how I feel my spirits rising in this fine air! Does my complexion
look any brighter, miss? Will you run a race with me, Mr. Moody, or will
you oblige me with a back at leap-frog? I’m not mad, my dear young lady;
I’m only merry. I live, you see, in the London stink; and the smell of
the hedges and the wild flowers is too much for me at first. It gets
into my head, it does. I’m drunk! As I live by bread, I’m drunk on fresh
air! Oh! what a jolly day! Oh! how young and innocent I do feel!” Here
his innocence got the better of him, and he began to sing, “I wish I
were a little fly, in my love’s bosom for to lie!” “Hullo! here we are
on the nice soft grass! and, oh, my gracious! there’s a bank running
down into a hollow! I can’t stand that, you know. Mr. Moody, hold my
hat, and take the greatest care of it. Here goes for a roll down the
bank!”

He handed his horrible hat to the astonished Moody, laid himself flat
on the top of the bank, and deliberately rolled down it, exactly as he
might have done when he was a boy. The tails of his long gray coat flew
madly in the wind: the dog pursued him, jumping over him, and barking
with delight; he shouted and screamed in answer to the dog as he rolled
over and over faster and faster; and, when he got up, on the level
ground, and called out cheerfully to his companions standing above him,
“I say, you two, I feel twenty years younger already!”--human gravity
could hold out no longer. The sad and silent Moody smiled, and Isabel
burst into fits of laughter.

“There,” he said “didn’t I tell you you would get used to me, Miss?
There’s a deal of life left in the old man yet--isn’t there? Shy me down
my hat, Mr. Moody. And now we’ll get to business!” He turned round to
the dog still barking at his heels. “Business, Puggy!” he called out
sharply, and Puggy instantly shut up his mouth, and said no more.

“Well, now,” Old Sharon resumed when he had joined his friends and had
got his breath again, “let’s have a little talk about yourself, miss.
Has Mr. Moody told you who I am, and what I want with you? Very good.
May I offer you my arm? No! You like to be independent, don’t you? All
right--I don’t object. I am an amiable old man, I am. About this Lady
Lydiard, now? Suppose you tell me how you first got acquainted with
her?”

In some surprise at this question, Isabel told her little story.
Observing Sharon’s face while she was speaking, Moody saw that he was
not paying the smallest attention to the narrative. His sharp, shameless
black eyes watched the girl’s face absently; his gross lips curled
upwards in a sardonic and self-satisfied smile. He was evidently setting
a trap for her of some kind. Without a word of warning--while Isabel was
in the middle of a sentence--the trap opened, with the opening of Old
Sharon’s lips.

“I say,” he burst out. “How came _you_ to seal her Ladyship’s
letter--eh?”

The question bore no sort of relation, direct or indirect, to what
Isabel happened to be saying at the moment. In the sudden surprise of
hearing it, she started and fixed her eyes in astonishment on Sharon’s
face. The old vagabond chuckled to himself. “Did you see that?” he
whispered to Moody. “I beg your pardon, miss,” he went on; “I won’t
interrupt you again. Lord! how interesting it is!--ain’t it, Mr. Moody?
Please to go on, miss.”

But Isabel, though she spoke with perfect sweetness and temper, declined
to go on. “I had better tell you, sir, how I came to seal her Ladyship’s
letter,” she said. “If I may venture on giving my opinion, _that_
part of my story seems to be the only part of it which relates to your
business with me to-day.”

Without further preface she described the circumstances which had led
to her assuming the perilous responsibility of sealing the letter. Old
Sharon’s wandering attention began to wander again: he was evidently
occupied in setting another trap. For the second time he interrupted
Isabel in the middle of a sentence. Suddenly stopping short, he pointed
to some sheep, at the further end of the field through which they
happened to be passing at the moment.

“There’s a pretty sight,” he said. “There are the innocent sheep
a-feeding--all following each other as usual. And there’s the sly dog
waiting behind the gate till the sheep wants his services. Reminds me
of Old Sharon and the public!” He chuckled over the discovery of the
remarkable similarity between the sheep-dog and himself, and the sheep
and the public--and then burst upon Isabel with a second question. “I
say! didn’t you look at the letter before you sealed it?”

“Certainly not!” Isabel answered.

“Not even at the address?”

“No!”

“Thinking of something else--eh?”

“Very likely,” said Isabel.

“Was it your new bonnet, my dear?”

Isabel laughed. “Women are not always thinking of their new bonnets,”
 she answered.

Old Sharon, to all appearance, dropped the subject there. He lifted his
lean brown forefinger and pointed again--this time to a house at a short
distance from them. “That’s a farmhouse, surely?” he said. “I’m thirsty
after my roll down the hill. Do you think, Miss, they would give me a
drink of milk?”

“I am sure they would,” said Isabel. “I know the people. Shall I go and
ask them?”

“Thank you, my dear. One word more before you go. About the sealing of
that letter? What _could_ you have been thinking of while you were doing
it?” He looked hard at her, and took her suddenly by the arm. “Was it
your sweetheart?” he asked, in a whisper.

The question instantly reminded Isabel that she had been thinking of
Hardyman while she sealed the letter. She blushed as the remembrance
crossed her mind. Robert, noticing the embarrassment, spoke sharply to
Old Sharon. “You have no right to put such a question to a young lady,”
 he said. “Be a little more careful for the future.”

“There! there! don’t be hard on me,” pleaded the old rogue. “An ugly old
man like me may make his innocent little joke--eh, miss? I’m sure you’re
too sweet-tempered to be angry when I meant no offense.. Show me that
you bear no malice. Go, like a forgiving young angel, and ask for the
milk.”

Nobody appealed to Isabel’s sweetness of temper in vain. “I will do it
with pleasure,” she said--and hastened away to the farmhouse.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE instant Isabel was out of hearing, Old Sharon slapped Moody on the
shoulder to rouse his attention. “I’ve got her out of the way,” he said,
“now listen to me. My business with the young angel is done--I may go
back to London.”

Moody looked at him with astonishment.

“Lord! how little you know of thieves!” exclaimed Old Sharon. “Why, man
alive, I have tried her with two plain tests! If you wanted a proof of
her innocence, there it was, as plain as the nose in your face. Did you
hear me ask her how she came to seal the letter--just when her mind was
running on something else?”

“I heard you,” said Moody.

“Did you see how she started and stared at me?”

“I did.”

“Well, I can tell you this--if she _had_ stolen the money she would
neither have started nor stared. She would have had her answer ready
beforehand in her own mind, in case of accidents. There’s only one
thing in my experience that you can never do with a thief, when a thief
happens to be a woman--you can never take her by surprise. Put that
remark by in your mind; one day you may find a use for remembering it.
Did you see her blush, and look quite hurt in her feelings, pretty dear,
when I asked about her sweetheart? Do you think a thief, in her place,
would have shown such a face as that? Not she! The thief would have been
relieved. The thief would have said to herself, ‘All right! the more
the old fool talks about sweethearts the further he is from tracing the
robbery to Me!’ Yes! yes! the ground’s cleared now, Master Moody. I’ve
reckoned up the servants; I’ve questioned Miss Isabel; I’ve made my
inquiries in all the other quarters that may be useful to us--and what’s
the result? The advice I gave, when you and the lawyer first came to
me--I hate that fellow!--remains as sound and good advice as ever. I
have got the thief in my mind,” said Old Sharon, closing his cunning
eyes and then opening them again, “as plain as I’ve got you in my eye at
this minute. No more of that now,” he went on, looking round sharply at
the path that led to the farmhouse. “I’ve something particular to say to
you--and there’s barely time to say it before that nice girl comes back.
Look here! Do you happen to be acquainted with Mr.-Honorable-Hardyman’s
valet?”

Moody’s eyes rested on Old Sharon with a searching and doubtful look.

“Mr. Hardyman’s valet?” he repeated. “I wasn’t prepared to hear Mr.
Hardyman’s name.”

Old Sharon looked at Moody, in his turn, with a flash of sardonic
triumph.

“Oho!” he said. “Has my good boy learned his lesson? Do you see the
thief through my spectacles, already?”

“I began to see him,” Moody answered, “when you gave us the guinea
opinion at your lodgings.”

“Will you whisper his name?” asked Old Sharon.

“Not yet. I distrust my own judgment. I wait till time proves that you
are right.”

Old Sharon knitted his shaggy brows and shook his head. “If you had
only a little more dash and go in you,” he said, “you would be a clever
fellow. As it is--!” He finished the sentence by snapping his fingers
with a grin of contempt. “Let’s get to business. Are you going back by
the next train along with me? or are you going to stop with the young
lady?”

“I will follow you by a later train,” Moody answered.

“Then I must give you my instructions at once,” Sharon continued. “You
get better acquainted with Hardyman’s valet. Lend him money if he wants
it--stick at nothing to make a bosom friend of him. I can’t do that part
of it; my appearance would be against me. _You_ are the man--you are
respectable from the top of your hat to the tips of your boots; nobody
would suspect You. Don’t make objections! Can you fix the valet? Or
can’t you?”

“I can try,” said Moody. “And what then?”

Old Sharon put his gross lips disagreeably close to Moody’s ear.

“Your friend the valet can tell you who his master’s bankers are,”
 he said; “and he can supply you with a specimen of his master’s
handwriting.”

Moody drew back, as suddenly as if his vagabond companion had put a
knife to his throat. “You old villain!” he said. “Are you tempting me to
forgery?”

“You infernal fool!” retorted Old Sharon. “_Will_ you hold that long
tongue of yours, and hear what I have to say. You go to Hardyman’s
bankers, with a note in Hardyman’s handwriting (exactly imitated by me)
to this effect:--‘Mr. H. presents his compliments to Messrs. So-and-So,
and is not quite certain whether a payment of five hundred pounds has
been made within the last week to his account. He will be much obliged
if Messrs. So-and-So will inform him by a line in reply, whether there
is such an entry to his credit in their books, and by whom the payment
has been made.’ You wait for the bankers’ answer, and bring it to me.
It’s just possible that the name you’re afraid to whisper may appear
in the letter. If it does, we’ve caught our man. Is _that_ forgery, Mr.
Muddlehead Moody? I’ll tell you what--if I had lived to be your age, and
knew no more of the world than you do, I’d go and hang myself. Steady!
here’s our charming friend with the milk. Remember your instructions,
and don’t lose heart if my notion of the payment to the bankers comes
to nothing. I know what to do next, in that case--and, what’s more, I’ll
take all the risk and trouble on my own shoulders. Oh, Lord! I’m afraid
I shall be obliged to drink the milk, now it’s come!”

With this apprehension in his mind, he advanced to relieve Isabel of the
jug that she carried.

“Here’s a treat!” he burst out, with an affectation of joy, which was
completely belied by the expression of his dirty face. “Here’s a kind
and dear young lady, to help an old man to a drink with her own pretty
hands.” He paused, and looked at the milk very much as he might have
looked at a dose of physic. “Will anyone take a drink first?” he asked,
offering the jug piteously to Isabel and Moody. “You see, I’m not wed to
genuine milk; I’m used to chalk and water. I don’t know what effect the
unadulterated cow might have on my poor old inside.” He tasted the milk
with the greatest caution. “Upon my soul, this is too rich for me! The
unadulterated cow is a deal too strong to be drunk alone. If you’ll
allow me I’ll qualify it with a drop of gin. Here, Puggy, Puggy!” He
set the milk down before the dog; and, taking a flask out of his pocket,
emptied it at a draught. “That’s something like!” he said, smacking his
lips with an air of infinite relief. “So sorry, Miss, to have given you
all your trouble for nothing; it’s my ignorance that’s to blame, not me.
I couldn’t know I was unworthy of genuine milk till I tried--could I?
And do you know,” he proceeded, with his eyes directed slyly on the way
back to the station, “I begin to think I’m not worthy of the fresh air,
either. A kind of longing seems to come over me for the London stink.
I’m home-sick already for the soot of my happy childhood and my own dear
native mud. The air here is too thin for me, and the sky’s too clean;
and--oh, Lord!--when you’re wed to the roar of the traffic--the ‘busses
and the cabs and what not--the silence in these parts is downright
awful. I’ll wish you good evening, miss; and get back to London.”

Isabel turned to Moody with disappointment plainly expressed in her face
and manner.

“Is that all he has to say?” she asked. “You told me he could help us.
You led me to suppose he could find the guilty person.”

Sharon heard her. “I could name the guilty person,” he answered, “as
easily, miss, as I could name you.”

“Why don’t you do it then?” Isabel inquired, not very patiently

“Because the time’s not ripe for it yet, miss--that’s one reason.
Because, if I mentioned the thief’s name, as things are now, you, Miss
Isabel, would think me mad; and you would tell Mr. Moody I had cheated
him out of his money--that’s another reason. The matter’s in train, if
you will only wait a little longer.”

“So you say,” Isabel rejoined. “If you really could name the thief, I
believe you would do it now.”

She turned away with a frown on her pretty face. Old Sharon followed
her. Even his coarse sensibilities appeared to feel the irresistible
ascendancy of beauty and youth.

“I say!” he began, “we must part friends, you know--or I shall break my
heart over it. They have got milk at the farmhouse. Do you think they
have got pen, ink, and paper too?”

Isabel answered, without turning to look at him, “Of course they have!”

“And a bit of sealing-wax?”

“I daresay!”

Old Sharon laid his dirty claws on her shoulder and forced her to face
him as the best means of shaking them off.

“Come along!” he said. “I am going to pacify you with some information
in writing.”

“Why should you write it?” Isabel asked suspiciously.

“Because I mean to make my own conditions, my dear, before I let you
into the secret.”

In ten minutes more they were all three in the farmhouse parlor. Nobody
but the farmer’s wife was at home. The good woman trembled from head to
foot at the sight of Old Sharon. In all her harmless life she had never
yet seen humanity under the aspect in which it was now presented to her.
“Mercy preserve us, Miss!” she whispered to Isabel, “how come you to
be in such company as _that?_” Instructed by Isabel, she produced the
necessary materials for writing and sealing--and, that done, she shrank
away to the door. “Please to excuse me, miss,” she said with a last
horrified look at her venerable visitor; “I really can’t stand the sight
of such a blot of dirt as that in my nice clean parlor.” With those
words she disappeared, and was seen no more.

Perfectly indifferent to his reception, Old Sharon wrote, inclosed what
he had written in an envelope; and sealed it (in the absence of anything
better fitted for his purpose) with the mouthpiece of his pipe.

“Now, miss,” he said, “you give me your word of honor,”--he stopped and
looked round at Moody with a grin--“and you give me yours, that you
won’t either of you break the seal on this envelope till the expiration
of one week from the present day. There are the conditions, Miss Isabel,
on which I’ll give you your information. If you stop to dispute with me,
the candle’s alight, and I’ll burn it!”

It was useless to contend with him. Isabel and Moody gave him the
promise that he required. He handed the sealed envelope to Isabel with
a low bow. “When the week’s out,” he said, “you will own I’m a cleverer
fellow than you think me now. Wish you good evening, Miss. Come along,
Puggy! Farewell to the horrid clean country, and back again to the nice
London stink!”

He nodded to Moody--he leered at Isabel--he chuckled to himself--he left
the farmhouse.




CHAPTER XV.

ISABEL looked down at the letter in her hand--considered it in
silence--and turned to Moody. “I feel tempted to open it already,” she
said.

“After giving your promise?” Moody gently remonstrated.

Isabel met that objection with a woman’s logic.

“Does a promise matter?” she asked, “when one gives it to a dirty,
disreputable, presuming old wretch like Mr. Sharon? It’s a wonder to me
that you trust such a creature. _I_ wouldn’t!”

“I doubted him just as you do,” Moody answered, “when I first saw him in
company with Mr. Troy. But there was something in the advice he gave
us at that first consultation which altered my opinion of him for the
better. I dislike his appearance and his manners as much as you do--I
may even say I felt ashamed of bringing such a person to see you. And
yet I can’t think that I have acted unwisely in employing Mr. Sharon.”

Isabel listened absently. She had something more to say, and she was
considering how she should say it. “May I ask you a bold question?” she
began.

“Any question you like.”

“Have you--” she hesitated and looked embarrassed. “Have you paid Mr.
Sharon much money?” she resumed, suddenly rallying her courage. Instead
of answering, Moody suggested that it was time to think of returning
to Miss Pink’s villa. “Your aunt may be getting anxious about you.” he
said.

Isabel led the way out of the farmhouse in silence. She reverted to Mr.
Sharon and the money, however, as they returned by the path across the
fields.

“I am sure you will not be offended with me,” she said gently, “if I own
that I am uneasy about the expense. I am allowing you to use your purse
as if it was mine--and I have hardly any savings of my own.”

Moody entreated her not to speak of it. “How can I put my money to a
better use than in serving your interests?” he asked. “My one object
in life is to relieve you of your present anxieties. I shall be
the happiest man living if you only owe a moment’s happiness to my
exertions!”

Isabel took his hand, and looked at him with grateful tears in her eyes.

“How good you are to me, Mr. Moody!” she said. “I wish I could tell you
how deeply I feel your kindness.”

“You can do it easily,” he answered, with a smile. “Call me
‘Robert’--don’t call me ‘Mr. Moody.’”

She took his arm with a sudden familiarity that charmed him. “If you had
been my brother I should have called you ‘Robert,’” she said; “and no
brother could have been more devoted to me than you are.”

He looked eagerly at her bright face turned up to his. “May I never
hope to be something nearer and dearer to you than a brother?” he asked
timidly.

She hung her head and said nothing. Moody’s memory recalled Sharon’s
coarse reference to her “sweetheart.” She had blushed when he put the
question? What had she done when Moody put _his_ question? Her face
answered for her--she had turned pale; she was looking more serious than
usual. Ignorant as he was of the ways of women, his instinct told him
that this was a bad sign. Surely her rising color would have confessed
it, if time and gratitude together were teaching her to love him? He
sighed as the inevitable conclusion forced itself on his mind.

“I hope I have not offended you?” he said sadly.

“Oh, no.”

“I wish I had not spoken. Pray don’t think that I am serving you with
any selfish motive.”

“I don’t think that, Robert. I never could think it of _you_.”

He was not quite satisfied yet. “Even if you were to marry some other
man,” he went on earnestly, “it would make no difference in what I am
trying to do for you. No matter what I might suffer, I should still go
on--for your sake.”

“Why do you talk so?” she burst out passionately. “No other man has such
a claim as you to my gratitude and regard. How can you let such thoughts
come to you? I have done nothing in secret. I have no friends who are
not known to you. Be satisfied with that, Robert--and let us drop the
subject.”

“Never to take it up again?” he asked, with the infatuated pertinacity
of a man clinging to his last hope.

At other times and under other circumstances, Isabel might have answered
him sharply. She spoke with perfect gentleness now.

“Not for the present,” she said. “I don’t know my own heart. Give me
time.”

His gratitude caught at those words, as the drowning man is said to
catch at the proverbial straw. He lifted her hand, and suddenly and
fondly pressed his lips on it. She showed no confusion. Was she sorry
for him, poor wretch!--and was that all?

They walked on, arm-in-arm, in silence.

Crossing the last field, they entered again on the high road leading
to the row of villas in which Miss Pink lived. The minds of both
were preoccupied. Neither of them noticed a gentleman approaching on
horseback, followed by a mounted groom. He was advancing slowly, at the
walking-pace of his horse, and he only observed the two foot-passengers
when he was close to them.

“Miss Isabel!”

She started, looked up, and discovered--Alfred Hardyman.

He was dressed in a perfectly-made travelling suit of light brown,
with a peaked felt hat of a darker shade of the same color, which, in
a picturesque sense, greatly improved his personal appearance. His
pleasure at discovering Isabel gave the animation to his features which
they wanted on ordinary occasions. He sat his horse, a superb hunter,
easily and gracefully. His light amber-colored gloves fitted him
perfectly. His obedient servant, on another magnificent horse, waited
behind him. He looked the impersonation of rank and breeding--of wealth
and prosperity. What a contrast, in a woman’s eyes, to the shy, pale,
melancholy man, in the ill-fitting black clothes, with the wandering,
uneasy glances, who stood beneath him, and felt, and showed that he
felt, his inferior position keenly! In spite of herself, the treacherous
blush flew over Isabel’s face, in Moody’s presence, and with Moody’s
eyes distrustfully watching her.

“This is a piece of good fortune that I hardly hoped for,” said
Hardyman, his cool, quiet, dreary way of speaking quickened as usual,
in Isabel’s presence. “I only got back from France this morning, and
I called on Lady Lydiard in the hope of seeing you. She was not at
home--and you were in the country--and the servants didn’t know the
address. I could get nothing out of them, except that you were on a
visit to a relation.” He looked at Moody while he was speaking. “Haven’t
I seen you before?” he said, carelessly. “Yes; at Lady Lydiard’s. You’re
her steward, are you not? How d’ye do?” Moody, with his eyes on the
ground, answered silently by a bow. Hardyman, perfectly indifferent
whether Lady Lydiard’s steward spoke or not, turned on his saddle and
looked admiringly at Isabel. “I begin to think I am a lucky man at
last,” he went on with a smile. “I was jogging along to my farm, and
despairing of ever seeing Miss Isabel again--and Miss Isabel herself
meets me at the roadside! I wonder whether you are as glad to see me as
I am to see you? You won’t tell me--eh? May I ask you something else?
Are you staying in our neighborhood?”

There was no alternative before Isabel but to answer this last question.
Hardyman had met her out walking, and had no doubt drawn the inevitable
inference--although he was too polite to say so in plain words.

“Yes, sir,” she answered, shyly, “I am staying in this neighborhood.”

“And who is your relation?” Hardyman proceeded, in his easy,
matter-of-course way. “Lady Lydiard told me, when I had the pleasure of
meeting you at her house, that you had an aunt living in the country.
I have a good memory, Miss Isabel, for anything that I hear about You!
It’s your aunt, isn’t it? Yes? I know everybody about hew. What is your
aunt’s name?”

Isabel, still resting her hand on Robert’s arm, felt it tremble a little
as Hardyman made this last inquiry. If she had been speaking to one of
her equals she would have known how to dispose of the question without
directly answering it. But what could she say to the magnificent
gentleman on the stately horse? He had only to send his servant into the
village to ask who the young lady from London was staying with, and the
answer, in a dozen mouths at least, would direct him to her aunt. She
cast one appealing look at Moody and pronounced the distinguished name
of Miss Pink.

“Miss Pink?” Hardyman repeated. “Surely I know Miss Pink?” (He had not
the faintest remembrances of her.) “Where did I meet her last?” (He ran
over in his memory the different local festivals at which strangers
had been introduced to him.) “Was it at the archery meeting? or at the
grammar-school when the prizes were given? No? It must have been at the
flower show, then, surely?”

It _had_ been at the flower show. Isabel had heard it from Miss Pink
fifty times at least, and was obliged to admit it now.

“I am quite ashamed of never having called,” Hardyman proceeded. “The
fact is, I have so much to do. I am a bad one at paying visits. Are you
on your way home? Let me follow you and make my apologies personally to
Miss Pink.”

Moody looked at Isabel. It was only a momentary glance, but she
perfectly understood it.

“I am afraid, sir, my aunt cannot have the honor of seeing you to-day,”
 she said.

Hardyman was all compliance. He smiled and patted his horse’s neck.
“To-morrow, then,” he said. “My compliments, and I will call in the
afternoon. Let me see: Miss Pink lives at--?” He waited, as if he
expected Isabel to assist his treacherous memory once more. She
hesitated again. Hardyman looked round at his groom. The groom could
find out the address, even if he did not happen to know it already.
Besides, there was the little row of houses visible at the further end
of the road. Isabel pointed to the villas, as a necessary concession
to good manners, before the groom could anticipate her. “My aunt lives
there, sir; at the house called The Lawn.”

“Ah! to be sure!” said Hardyman. “I oughtn’t to have wanted reminding;
but I have so many things to think of at the farm. And I am afraid I
must be getting old--my memory isn’t as good as it was. I am so glad to
have seen you, Miss Isabel. You and your aunt must come and look at my
horses. Do you like horses? Are you fond of riding? I have a quiet roan
mare that is used to carrying ladies; she would be just the thing for
you. Did I beg you to give my best compliments to your aunt? Yes? How
well you are looking! our air here agrees with you. I hope I haven’t
kept you standing too long? I didn’t think of it in the pleasure of
meeting you. Good-by, Miss Isabel; good-by, till to-morrow!”

He took off his hat to Isabel, nodded to Moody, and pursued his way to
the farm.

Isabel looked at her companion. His eyes were still on the ground. Pale,
silent, motionless, he waited by her like a dog, until she gave the
signal of walking on again towards the house.

“You are not angry with me for speaking to Mr. Hardyman?” she asked,
anxiously.

He lifted his head it the sound of her voice. “Angry with you, my dear!
why should I be angry?”

“You seem so changed, Robert, since we met Mr. Hardyman. I couldn’t help
speaking to him--could I?”

“Certainly not.”

They moved on towards the villa. Isabel was still uneasy. There was
something in Moody’s silent submission to all that she said and all that
she did which pained and humiliated her. “You’re not jealous?” she said,
smiling timidly.

He tried to speak lightly on his side. “I have no time to be jealous
while I have your affairs to look after,” he answered.

She pressed his arm tenderly. “Never fear, Robert, that new friends will
make me forget the best and dearest friend who is now at my side.” She
paused, and looked up at him with a compassionate fondness that was very
pretty to see. “I can keep out of the way to-morrow, when Mr. Hardyman
calls,” she said. “It is my aunt he is coming to see--not me.”

It was generously meant. But while her mind was only occupied with the
present time, Moody’s mind was looking into the future. He was learning
the hard lesson of self-sacrifice already. “Do what you think is right,”
 he said quietly; “don’t think of me.”

They reached the gate of the villa. He held out his hand to say good-by.

“Won’t you come in?” she asked. “Do come in!”

“Not now, my dear. I must get back to London as soon as I can. There is
some more work to be done for you, and the sooner I do it the better.”

She heard his excuse without heeding it.

“You are not like yourself, Robert,” she said. “Why is it? What are you
thinking of?”

He was thinking of the bright blush that overspread her face when
Hardyman first spoke to her; he was thinking of the invitation to her
to see the stud-farm, and to ride the roan mare; he was thinking of the
utterly powerless position in which he stood towards Isabel and towards
the highly-born gentleman who admired her. But he kept his doubts and
fears to himself. “The train won’t wait for me,” he said, and held out
his hand once more.

She was not only perplexed; she was really distressed. “Don’t take leave
of me in that cold way!” she pleaded. Her eyes dropped before his, and
her lips trembled a little. “Give me a kiss, Robert, at parting.” She
said those bold words softly and sadly, out of the depth of her pity
for him. He started; his face brightened suddenly; his sinking hope
rose again. In another moment the change came; in another moment he
understood her. As he touched her cheek with his lips, he turned pale
again. “Don’t quite forget me,” he said, in low, faltering tones--and
left her.

Miss Pink met Isabel in the hall. Refreshed by unbroken repose, the
ex-schoolmistress was in the happiest frame of mind for the reception of
her niece’s news.

Informed that Moody had travelled to South Morden to personally report
the progress of the inquiries, Miss Pink highly approved of him as a
substitute for Mr. Troy. “Mr. Moody, as a banker’s son, is a gentleman
by birth,” she remarked; “he has condescended, in becoming Lady
Lydiard’s steward. What I saw of him, when he came here with you,
prepossessed me in his favor. He has my confidence, Isabel, as well as
yours--he is in every respect a superior person to Mr. Troy. Did you
meet any friends, my dear, when you were out walking?”

The answer to this question produced a species of transformation in Miss
Pink. The rapturous rank-worship of her nation feasted, so to speak, on
Hardyman’s message. She looked taller and younger than usual--she was
all smiles and sweetness. “At last, Isabel, you have seen birth and
breeding under their right aspect,” she said. “In the society of Lady
Lydiard, you cannot possibly have formed correct ideas of the English
aristocracy. Observe Mr. Hardyman when he does me the honor to call
to-morrow--and you will see the difference.”

“Mr. Hardyman is your visitor, aunt--not mine. I was going to ask you to
let me remain upstairs in my room.”

Miss Pink was unaffectedly shocked. “This is what you learn at Lady
Lydiard’s!” she observed. “No, Isabel, your absence would be a breach
of good manners--I cannot possibly permit it. You will be present to
receive our distinguished friend with me. And mind this!” added Miss
Pink, in her most impressive manner, “If Mr. Hardyman should by any
chance ask why you have left Lady Lydiard, not one word about those
disgraceful circumstances which connect you with the loss of the
banknote! I should sink into the earth if the smallest hint of what
has really happened should reach Mr. Hardyman’s ears. My child, I stand
towards you in the place of your lamented mother; I have the right to
command your silence on this horrible subject, and I do imperatively
command it.”

In these words foolish Miss Pink sowed the seed for the harvest of
trouble that was soon to come.




CHAPTER XVI.

PAYING his court to the ex-schoolmistress on the next day, Hardyman made
such excellent use of his opportunities that the visit to the stud-farm
took place on the day after. His own carriage was placed at the disposal
of Isabel and her aunt; and his own sister was present to confer special
distinction on the reception of Miss Pink.

In a country like England, which annually suspends the sitting of its
Legislature in honor of a horse-race, it is only natural and proper that
the comfort of the horses should be the first object of consideration at
a stud-farm. Nine-tenths of the land at Hardyman’s farm was devoted, in
one way or another, to the noble quadruped with the low forehead and the
long nose. Poor humanity was satisfied with second-rate and third-rate
accommodation. The ornamental grounds, very poorly laid out, were also
very limited in extent--and, as for the dwelling-house, it was literally
a cottage. A parlor and a kitchen, a smoking-room, a bed-room, and a
spare chamber for a friend, all scantily furnished, sufficed for the
modest wants of the owner of the property. If you wished to feast your
eyes on luxury you went to the stables.

The stud-farm being described, the introduction to Hardyman’s sister
follows in due course.

The Honorable Lavinia Hardyman was, as all persons in society know,
married rather late in life to General Drumblade. It is saying a great
deal, but it is not saying too much, to describe Mrs. Drumblade as the
most mischievous woman of her age in all England. Scandal was the breath
of her life; to place people in false positions, to divulge secrets
and destroy characters, to undermine friendships, and aggravate
enmities--these were the sources of enjoyment from which this dangerous
woman drew the inexhaustible fund of good spirits that made her a
brilliant light in the social sphere. She was one of the privileged
sinners of modern society. The worst mischief that she could work was
ascribed to her “exuberant vitality.” She had that ready familiarity of
manner which is (in _her_ class) so rarely discovered to be insolence in
disguise. Her power of easy self-assertion found people ready to accept
her on her own terms wherever she went. She was one of those big,
overpowering women, with blunt manners, voluble tongues, and goggle
eyes, who carry everything before them. The highest society modestly
considered itself in danger of being dull in the absence of Mrs.
Drumblade. Even Hardyman himself--who saw as little of her as possible,
whose frankly straightforward nature recoiled by instinct from contact
with his sister--could think of no fitter person to make Miss Pink’s
reception agreeable to her, while he was devoting his own attentions to
her niece. Mrs. Drumblade accepted the position thus offered with
the most amiable readiness. In her own private mind she placed an
interpretation on her brother’s motives which did him the grossest
injustice. She believed that Hardyman’s designs on Isabel contemplated
the most profligate result. To assist this purpose, while the girl’s
nearest relative was supposed to be taking care of her, was Mrs.
Drumblade’s idea of “fun.” Her worst enemies admitted that the honorable
Lavinia had redeeming qualities, and owned that a keen sense of humor was
one of her merits.

Was Miss Pink a likely person to resist the fascinations of Mrs.
Drumblade? Alas, for the ex-schoolmistress! before she had been five
minutes at the farm, Hardyman’s sister had fished for her, caught her,
landed her. Poor Miss Pink!

Mrs. Drumblade could assume a grave dignity of manner when the occasion
called for it. She was grave, she was dignified, when Hardyman performed
the ceremonies of introduction. She would not say she was charmed to
meet Miss Pink--the ordinary slang of society was not for Miss Pink’s
ears--she would say she felt this introduction as a privilege. It was
so seldom one met with persons of trained intellect in society. Mrs.
Drumblade was already informed of Miss Pink’s earlier triumphs in the
instruction of youth. Mrs. Drumblade had not been blessed with children
herself; but she had nephews and nieces, and she was anxious about their
education, especially the nieces. What a sweet, modest girl Miss Isabel
was! The fondest wish she could form for her nieces would be that they
should resemble Miss Isabel when they grew up. The question was, as to
the best method of education. She would own that she had selfish motives
in becoming acquainted with Miss Pink. They were at the farm, no doubt,
to see Alfred’s horses. Mrs. Drumblade did not understand horses; her
interest was in the question of education. She might even confess that
she had accepted Alfred’s invitation in the hope of hearing Miss
Pink’s views. There would be opportunities, she trusted, for a little
instructive conversation on that subject. It was, perhaps, ridiculous to
talk, at her age, of feeling as if she was Miss Pink’s pupil; and yet
it exactly expressed the nature of the aspiration which was then in her
mind.

In these terms, feeling her way with the utmost nicety, Mrs. Drumblade
wound the net of flattery round and round Miss Pink until her hold on
that innocent lady was, in every sense of the word, secure. Before half
the horses had been passed under review, Hardyman and Isabel were out of
sight, and Mrs. Drumblade and Miss Pink were lost in the intricacies
of the stables. “Excessively stupid of me! We had better go back, and
establish ourselves comfortably in the parlor. When my brother misses
us, he and your charming niece will return to look for us in the
cottage.” Under cover of this arrangement the separation became
complete. Miss Pink held forth on education to Mrs. Drumblade in the
parlor; while Hardyman and Isabel were on their way to a paddock at the
farthest limits of the property.

“I am afraid you are getting a little tired,” said Hardyman. “Won’t you
take my arm?”

Isabel was on her guard: she had not forgotten what Lady Lydiard had
said to her. “No, thank you, Mr. Hardyman; I am a better walker than you
think.”

Hardyman continued the conversation in his blunt, resolute way. “I
wonder whether you will believe me,” he asked, “if I tell you that this
is one of the happiest days of my life.”

“I should think you were always happy,” Isabel cautiously replied,
“having such a pretty place to live in as this.”

Hardyman met that answer with one of his quietly-positive denials. “A
man is never happy by himself,” he said. “He is happy with a companion.
For instance, I am happy with you.”

Isabel stopped and looked back. Hardyman’s language was becoming a
little too explicit. “Surely we have lost Mrs. Drumblade and my aunt,”
 she said. “I don’t see them anywhere.”

“You will see them directly; they are only a long way behind.” With this
assurance, he returned, in his own obstinate way, to his one object in
view. “Miss Isabel, I want to ask you a question. I’m not a ladies’ man.
I speak my mind plainly to everybody--women included. Do you like being
here to-day?”

Isabel’s gravity was not proof against this very downright question.
“I should be hard to please,” she said laughing, “if I didn’t enjoy my
visit to the farm.”

Hardyman pushed steadily forward through the obstacle of the farm to
the question of the farm’s master. “You like being here,” he repeated.
“Do you like Me?”

This was serious. Isabel drew back a little, and looked at him. He
waited with the most impenetrable gravity for her reply.

“I think you can hardly expect me to answer that question,” she said

“Why not?”

“Our acquaintance has been a very short one, Mr. Hardyman. And, if _you_
are so good as to forget the difference between us, I think _I_ ought to
remember it.”

“What difference?”

“The difference in rank.”

Hardyman suddenly stood still, and emphasized his next words by digging
his stick into the grass.

“If anything I have said has vexed you,” he began, “tell me so plainly,
Miss Isabel, and I’ll ask your pardon. But don’t throw my rank in my
face. I cut adrift from all that nonsense when I took this farm and got
my living out of the horses. What has a man’s rank to do with a man’s
feelings?” he went on, with another emphatic dig of his stick. “I am
quite serious in asking if you like me--for this good reason, that I
like you. Yes, I do. You remember that day when I bled the old
lady’s dog--well, I have found out since then that there’s a sort of
incompleteness in my life which I never suspected before. It’s you who
have put that idea into my head. You didn’t mean it, I dare say, but you
have done it all the same. I sat alone here yesterday evening smoking
my pipe--and I didn’t enjoy it. I breakfasted alone this morning--and I
didn’t enjoy _that_. I said to myself, She’s coming to lunch, that’s one
comfort--I shall enjoy lunch. That’s what I feel, roughly described. I
don’t suppose I’ve been five minutes together without thinking of you,
now in one way and now in another, since the day when I first saw you.
When a man comes to my time of life, and has had any experience, he
knows what that means. It means, in plain English, that his heart is set
on a woman. You’re the woman.”

Isabel had thus far made several attempts to interrupt him, without
success. But, when Hardyman’s confession attained its culminating point,
she insisted on being heard.

“If you will excuse me, sir,” she interposed gravely, “I think I had
better go back to the cottage. My aunt is a stranger here, and she
doesn’t know where to look for us.”

“We don’t want your aunt,” Hardyman remarked, in his most positive
manner.

“We do want her,” Isabel rejoined. “I won’t venture to say it’s wrong in
you, Mr. Hardyman, to talk to me as you have just done, but I am quite
sure it’s very wrong of me to listen.”

He looked at her with such unaffected surprise and distress that she
stopped, on the point of leaving him, and tried to make herself better
understood.

“I had no intention of offending you, sir,” she said, a little
confusedly. “I only wanted to remind you that there are some things
which a gentleman in your position--” She stopped, tried to finish the
sentence, failed, and began another. “If I had been a young lady in your
own rank of life,” she went on, “I might have thanked you for paying me
a compliment, and have given you a serious answer. As it is, I am afraid
that I must say that you have surprised and disappointed me. I can claim
very little for myself, I know. But I did imagine--so long as there
was nothing unbecoming in my conduct--that I had some right to your
respect.”

Listening more and more impatiently, Hardyman took her by the hand, and
burst out with another of his abrupt questions.

“What can you possibly be thinking of?” he asked.

She gave him no answer; she only looked at him reproachfully, and tried
to release herself.

Hardyman held her hand faster than ever.

“I believe you think me an infernal scoundrel!” he said. “I can stand a
good deal, Miss Isabel, but I can’t stand _that_. How have I failed in
respect toward you, if you please? I have told you you’re the woman my
heart is set on. Well? Isn’t it plain what I want of you, when I say
that? Isabel Miller, I want you to be my wife!”

Isabel’s only reply to this extraordinary proposal of marriage was a
faint cry of astonishment, followed by a sudden trembling that shook her
from head to foot.

Hardyman put his arm round her with a gentleness which his oldest friend
would have been surprised to see in him.

“Take your time to think of it,” he said, dropping back again into his
usual quiet tone. “If you had known me a little better you wouldn’t have
mistaken me, and you wouldn’t be looking at me now as if you were afraid
to believe your own ears. What is there so very wonderful in my wanting
to marry you? I don’t set up for being a saint. When I was a younger man
I was no better (and no worse) than other young men. I’m getting on now
to middle life. I don’t want romances and adventures--I want an easy
existence with a nice lovable woman who will make me a good wife. You’re
the woman, I tell you again. I know it by what I’ve seen of you myself,
and by what I have heard of you from Lady Lydiard. She said you were
prudent, and sweet-tempered, and affectionate; to which I wish to add
that you have just the face and figure that I like, and the modest
manners and the blessed absence of all slang in your talk, which I don’t
find in the young women I meet with in the present day. That’s my view
of it: I think for myself. What does it matter to me whether you’re the
daughter of a Duke or the daughter of a Dairyman? It isn’t your father I
want to marry--it’s you. Listen to reason, there’s a dear! We have only
one question to settle before we go back to your aunt. You wouldn’t
answer me when I asked it a little while since. Will you answer now?
_Do_ you like me?”

Isabel looked up at him timidly.

“In my position, sir,” she asked, “have I any right to like you? What
would your relations and friends think, if I said Yes?”

Hardyman gave her waist a little admonitory squeeze with his arm

“What? You’re at it again? A nice way to answer a man, to call him
‘Sir,’ and to get behind his rank as if it was a place of refuge from
him! I hate talking of myself, but you force me to it. Here is my
position in the world--I have got an elder brother; he is married,
and he has a son to succeed him, in the title and the property. You
understand, so far? Very well! Years ago I shifted my share of the rank
(whatever it may be) on to my brother’s shoulders. He is a thorough good
fellow, and he has carried my dignity for me, without once dropping it,
ever since. As for what people may say, they have said it already, from
my father and mother downward, in the time when I took to the horses and
the farm. If they’re the wise people I take them for, they won’t be at
the trouble of saying it all over again. No, no. Twist it how you may,
Miss Isabel, whether I’m single or whether I’m married, I’m plain Alfred
Hardyman; and everybody who knows me knows that I go on my way,
and please myself. If you don’t like me, it will be the bitterest
disappointment I ever had in my life; but say so honestly, all the
same.”

Where is the woman in Isabel’s place whose capacity for resistance would
not have yielded a little to such an appeal as this?

“I should be an insensible wretch,” she replied warmly, “if I didn’t feel
the honor you have done me, and feel it gratefully.”

“Does that mean you will have me for a husband?” asked downright
Hardyman.

She was fairly driven into a corner; but (being a woman) she tried to
slip through his fingers at the last moment.

“Will you forgive me,” she said, “if I ask you for a little more time? I
am so bewildered, I hardly know what to say or do for the best. You see,
Mr. Hardyman, it would be a dreadful thing for me to be the cause of
giving offense to your family. I am obliged to think of that. It would
be so distressing for you (I will say nothing of myself) if your friends
closed their doors on me. They might say I was a designing girl, who had
taken advantage of your good opinion to raise herself in the world. Lady
Lydiard warned me long since not to be ambitious about myself and not
to forget my station in life, because she treated me like her adopted
daughter. Indeed--indeed, I can’t tell you how I feel your goodness, and
the compliment--the very great compliment, you pay me! My heart is free,
and if I followed my own inclinations--” She checked herself, conscious
that she was on the brink of saying too much. “Will you give me a few
days,” she pleaded, “to try if I can think composedly of all this? I
am only a girl, and I feel quite dazzled by the prospect that you set
before me.”

Hardyman seized on those words as offering all the encouragement that he
desired to his suit.

“Have your own way in this thing and in everything!” he said, with an
unaccustomed fervor of language and manner. “I am so glad to hear that
your heart is open to me, and that all your inclinations take my part.”

Isabel instantly protested against this misrepresentation of what she
had really said, “Oh, Mr. Hardyman, you quite mistake me!”

He answered her very much as he had answered Lady Lydiard, when she had
tried to make him understand his proper relations towards Isabel.

“No, no; I don’t mistake you. I agree to every word you say. How can I
expect you to marry me, as you very properly remark, unless I give you a
day or two to make up your mind? It’s quite enough for me that you like
the prospect. If Lady Lydiard treated you as her daughter, why shouldn’t
you be my wife? It stands to reason that you’re quite right to marry a
man who can raise you in the world. I like you to be ambitious--though
Heaven knows it isn’t much I can do for you, except to love you with all
my heart. Still, it’s a great encouragement to hear that her Ladyship’s
views agree with mine--”

“They don’t agree, Mr. Hardyman!” protested poor Isabel. “You are
entirely misrepresenting--”

Hardyman cordially concurred in this view of the matter. “Yes! yes! I
can’t pretend to represent her Ladyship’s language, or yours either; I
am obliged to take my words as they come to me. Don’t disturb yourself:
it’s all right--I understand. You have made me the happiest man living.
I shall ride over to-morrow to your aunt’s house, and hear what you have
to say to me. Mind you’re at home! Not a day must pass now without my
seeing you. I do love you, Isabel--I do, indeed!” He stooped, and kissed
her heartily. “Only to reward me,” he explained, “for giving you time to
think.”

She drew herself away from him--resolutely, not angrily. Before she
could make a third attempt to place the subject in its right light
before him, the luncheon bell rang at the cottage--and a servant
appeared evidently sent to look for them.

“Don’t forget to-morrow,” Hardyman whispered confidentially. “I’ll call
early--and then go to London, and get the ring.”




CHAPTER XVII.

EVENTS succeeded each other rapidly, after the memorable day to Isabel
of the luncheon at the farm.

On the next day (the ninth of the month) Lady Lydiard sent for her
steward, and requested him to explain his conduct in repeatedly leaving
the house without assigning any reason for his absence. She did not
dispute his claims to a freedom of action which would not be permitted
to an ordinary servant. Her objection to his present course of
proceeding related entirely to the mystery in which it was involved, and
to the uncertainty in which the household was left as to the hour of
his return. On those grounds, she thought herself entitled to an
explanation. Moody’s habitual reserve--strengthened, on this occasion,
by his dread of ridicule, if his efforts to serve Isabel ended in
failure--disinclined him to take Lady Lydiard into his confidence,
while his inquiries were still beset with obstacles and doubts. He
respectfully entreated her Ladyship to grant him a delay of a few
weeks before he entered on his explanation. Lady Lydiard’s quick temper
resented his request. She told Moody plainly that he was guilty of an
act of presumption in making his own conditions with his employer. He
received the reproof with exemplary resignation; but he held to his
conditions nevertheless. From that moment the result of the interview
was no longer in doubt. Moody was directed to send in his accounts. The
accounts having been examined, and found to be scrupulously correct, he
declined accepting the balance of salary that was offered to him. The
next day he left Lady Lydiard’s service.

On the tenth of the month her Ladyship received a letter from her
nephew.

The health of Felix had not improved. He had made up his mind to go
abroad again towards the end of the month. In the meantime, he had
written to his friend in Paris, and he had the pleasure of forwarding an
answer. The letter inclosed announced that the lost five-hundred-pound
note had been made the subject of careful inquiry in Paris. It had not
been traced. The French police offered to send to London one of their
best men, well acquainted with the English language, if Lady Lydiard was
desirous of employing him. He would be perfectly willing to act with an
English officer in conducting the investigation, should it be thought
necessary. Mr. Troy being consulted as to the expediency of accepting
this proposal, objected to the pecuniary terms demanded as being
extravagantly high. He suggested waiting a little before any reply was
sent to Paris; and he engaged meanwhile to consult a London solicitor
who had great experience in cases of theft, and whose advice might
enable them to dispense entirely with the services of the French police.

Being now a free man again, Moody was able to follow his own
inclinations in regard to the instructions which he had received from
Old Sharon.

The course that had been recommended to him was repellent to the
self-respect and the sense of delicacy which were among the inbred
virtues of Moody’s character. He shrank from forcing himself as a friend
on Hardyman’s valet: he recoiled from the idea of tempting the man to
steal a specimen of his master’s handwriting. After some consideration,
he decided on applying to the agent who collected the rents at
Hardyman’s London chambers. Being an old acquaintance of Moody’s,
this person would certainly not hesitate to communicate the address of
Hardyman’s bankers, if he knew it. The experiment, tried under these
favoring circumstances, proved perfectly successful. Moody proceeded to
Sharon’s lodgings the same day, with the address of the bankers in his
pocketbook. The old vagabond, greatly amused by Moody’s scruples,
saw plainly enough that, so long as he wrote the supposed letter from
Hardyman in the third person, it mattered little what handwriting was
employed, seeing that no signature would be necessary. The letter was at
once composed, on the model which Sharon had already suggested to Moody,
and a respectable messenger (so far as outward appearances went) was
employed to take it to the bank. In half an hour the answer came back.
It added one more to the difficulties which beset the inquiry after the
lost money. No such sum as five hundred pounds had been paid, within the
dates mentioned, to the credit of Hardyman’s account.

Old Sharon was not in the least discomposed by this fresh check. “Give
my love to the dear young lady,” he said with his customary impudence;
“and tell her we are one degree nearer to finding the thief.”

Moody looked at him, doubting whether he was in jest or in earnest.

“Must I squeeze a little more information into that thick head of
yours?” asked Sharon. With this question he produced a weekly newspaper,
and pointed to a paragraph which reported, among the items of sporting
news, Hardyman’s recent visit to a sale of horses at a town in the north
of France. “We know he didn’t pay the bank-note in to his account,”
 Sharon remarked. “What else did he do with it? Took it to pay for the
horses that he bought in France! Do you see your way a little plainer
now? Very good. Let’s try next if your money holds out. Somebody must
cross the Channel in search of the note. Which of us two is to sit in
the steam-boat with a white basin on his lap? Old Sharon, of course!” He
stopped to count the money still left, out of the sum deposited by Moody
to defray the cost of the inquiry. “All right!” he went on. “I’ve got
enough to pay my expenses there and back. Don’t stir out of London till
you hear from me. I can’t tell how soon I may not want you. If there’s
any difficulty in tracing the note, your hand will have to go into your
pocket again. Can’t you get the lawyer to join you? Lord! how I should
enjoy squandering _his_ money! It’s a downright disgrace to me to have
only got one guinea out of him. I could tear my flesh off my bones when
I think of it.”

The same night Old Sharon started for France, by way of Dover and
Calais.

Two days elapsed, and brought no news from Moody’s agent. On the third
day, he received some information relating to Sharon--not from the man
himself, but in a letter from Isabel Miller.

“For once, dear Robert,” she wrote, “my judgment has turned out to be
sounder than yours. That hateful old man has confirmed my worst opinion
of him. Pray have him punished. Take him before a magistrate and charge
him with cheating you out of your money. I inclose the sealed letter
which he gave me at the farmhouse. The week’s time before I was to
open it expired yesterday. Was there ever anything so impudent and so
inhuman? I am too vexed and angry about the money you have wasted on
this old wretch to write more. Yours, gratefully and affectionately,
Isabel.”

The letter in which Old Sharon had undertaken (by way of pacifying
Isabel) to write the name of the thief, contained these lines:

“You are a charming girl, my dear; but you still want one thing to make
you perfect--and that is a lesson in patience. I am proud and happy
to teach you. The name of the thief remains, for the present, Mr. ----
(Blank).”

From Moody’s point of view, there was but one thing to be said of this:
it was just like Old Sharon! Isabel’s letter was of infinitely greater
interest to him. He feasted his eyes on the words above the signature:
she signed herself, “Yours gratefully and affectionately.” Did the
last words mean that she was really beginning to be fond of him? After
kissing the word, he wrote a comforting letter to her, in which he
pledged himself to keep a watchful eye on Sharon, and to trust him with
no more money until he had honestly earned it first.

A week passed. Moody (longing to see Isabel) still waited in vain for
news from France. He had just decided to delay his visit to South Morden
no longer, when the errand-boy employed by Sharon brought him this
message: “The old ‘un’s at home, and waitin’ to see yer.”




CHAPTER XVIII.

SHARON’S news was not of an encouraging character. He had met with
serious difficulties, and had spent the last farthing of Moody’s money
in attempting to overcome them.

One discovery of importance he had certainly made. A horse withdrawn
from the sale was the only horse that had met with Hardyman’s approval.
He had secured the animal at the high reserved price of twelve thousand
francs--being four hundred and eighty pounds in English money; and he
had paid with an English bank-note. The seller (a French horse-dealer
resident in Brussels) had returned to Belgium immediately on completing
the negotiations. Sharon had ascertained his address, and had written to
him at Brussels, inclosing the number of the lost banknote. In two days
he had received an answer, informing him that the horse-dealer had been
called to England by the illness of a relative, and that he had hitherto
failed to send any address to which his letters could be forwarded.
Hearing this, and having exhausted his funds, Sharon had returned to
London. It now rested with Moody to decide whether the course of the
inquiry should follow the horse-dealer next. Here was the cash account,
showing how the money had been spent. And there was Sharon, with his
pipe in his mouth and his dog on his lap, waiting for orders.

Moody wisely took time to consider before he committed himself to a
decision. In the meanwhile, he ventured to recommend a new course of
proceeding which Sharon’s report had suggested to his mind.

“It seems to me,” he said, “that we have taken the roundabout way of
getting to our end in view, when the straight road lay before us. If Mr.
Hardyman has passed the stolen note, you know, as well as I do, that he
has passed it innocently. Instead of wasting time and money in trying to
trace a stranger, why not tell Mr. Hardyman what has happened, and ask
him to give us the number of the note? You can’t think of everything, I
know; but it does seem strange that this idea didn’t occur to you before
you went to France.”

“Mr. Moody,” said Old Sharon, “I shall have to cut your acquaintance.
You are a man without faith; I don’t like you. As if I hadn’t thought of
Hardyman weeks since!” he exclaimed contemptuously. “Are you really soft
enough to suppose that a gentleman in his position would talk about
his money affairs to me? You know mighty little of him if you do. A
fortnight since I sent one of my men (most respectably dressed) to hang
about his farm, and see what information he could pick up. My man became
painfully acquainted with the toe of a boot. It was thick, sir; and it
was Hardyman’s.”

“I will run the risk of the boot,” Moody replied, in his quiet way.

“And put the question to Hardyman?”

“Yes.”

“Very good,” said Sharon. “If you get your answer from his tongue,
instead of his boot, the case is cleared up--unless I have made a
complete mess of it. Look here, Moody! If you want to do me a good turn,
tell the lawyer that the guinea-opinion was the right one. Let him know
that _he_ was the fool, not you, when he buttoned up his pockets and
refused to trust me. And, I say,” pursued Old Sharon, relapsing into his
customary impudence, “you’re in love, you know, with that nice girl. I
like her myself. When you marry her invite me to the wedding. I’ll
make a sacrifice; I’ll brush my hair and wash my face in honor of the
occasion.”

Returning to his lodgings, Moody found two letters waiting on the table.
One of them bore the South Morden postmark. He opened that letter first.

It was written by Miss Pink. The first lines contained an urgent
entreaty to keep the circumstances connected with the loss of the five
hundred pounds the strictest secret from everyone in general, and from
Hardyman in particular. The reasons assigned for making the strange
request were next expressed in these terms: “My niece Isabel is, I
am happy to inform you, engaged to be married to Mr. Hardyman. If the
slightest hint reached him of her having been associated, no matter how
cruelly and unjustly, with a suspicion of theft, the marriage would be
broken off, and the result to herself and to everybody connected with
her, would be disgrace for the rest of our lives.”

On the blank space at the foot of the page a few words were added in
Isabel’s writing: “Whatever changes there may be in my life, your place
in my heart is one that no other person can fill: it is the place of my
dearest friend. Pray write and tell me that you are not distressed and
not angry. My one anxiety is that you should remember what I have always
told you about the state of my own feelings. My one wish is that you
will still let me love you and value you, as I might have loved and
valued a brother.”

The letter dropped from Moody’s hand. Not a word--not even a
sigh--passed his lips. In tearless silence he submitted to the pang that
wrung him. In tearless silence he contemplated the wreck of his life.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE narrative returns to South Morden, and follows the events which
attended Isabel’s marriage engagement.

To say that Miss Pink, inflated by the triumph, rose, morally speaking,
from the earth and floated among the clouds, is to indicate faintly the
effect produced on the ex-schoolmistress when her niece first informed
her of what had happened at the farm. Attacked on one side by her aunt,
and on the other by Hardyman, and feebly defended, at the best, by her
own doubts and misgivings, Isabel ended by surrendering at discretion.
Like thousands of other women in a similar position, she was in the last
degree uncertain as to the state of her own heart. To what extent she
was insensibly influenced by Hardyman’s commanding position in believing
herself to be sincerely attached to him, it was beyond her power of
self-examination to discover. He doubly dazzled her by his birth and
by his celebrity. Not in England only, but throughout Europe, he was a
recognized authority on his own subject. How could she--how could any
woman--resist the influence of his steady mind, his firmness of purpose,
his manly resolution to owe everything to himself and nothing to his
rank, set off as these attractive qualities were by the outward and
personal advantages which exercise an ascendancy of their own? Isabel
was fascinated, and yet Isabel was not at ease. In her lonely moments
she was troubled by regretful thoughts of Moody, which perplexed and
irritated her. She had always behaved honestly to him; she had never
encouraged him to hope that his love for her had the faintest prospect
of being returned. Yet, knowing, as she did, that her conduct was
blameless so far, there were nevertheless perverse sympathies in her
which took his part. In the wakeful hours of the night there were
whispering voices in her which said: “Think of Moody!” Had there been
a growing kindness towards this good friend in her heart, of which she
herself was not aware? She tried to detect it--to weigh it for what it
was really worth. But it lay too deep to be discovered and estimated,
if it did really exist--if it had any sounder origin than her own morbid
fancy. In the broad light of day, in the little bustling duties of life,
she forgot it again. She could think of what she ought to wear on the
wedding day; she could even try privately how her new signature, “Isabel
Hardyman,” would look when she had the right to use it. On the whole, it
may be said that the time passed smoothly--with some occasional checks
and drawbacks, which were the more easily endured seeing that they took
their rise in Isabel’s own conduct. Compliant as she was in general,
there were two instances, among others, in which her resolution to take
her own way was not to be overcome. She refused to write either to Moody
or to Lady Lydiard informing them of her engagement; and she steadily
disapproved of Miss Pink’s policy of concealment, in the matter of the
robbery at Lady Lydiard’s house. Her aunt could only secure her as a
passive accomplice by stating family considerations in the strongest
possible terms. “If the disgrace was confined to you, my dear, I might
leave you to decide. But I am involved in it, as your nearest relative;
and, what is more, even the sacred memories of your father and mother
might feel the slur cast on them.” This exaggerated language--like all
exaggerated language, a mischievous weapon in the arsenal of weakness
and prejudice--had its effect on Isabel. Reluctantly and sadly, she
consented to be silent.

Miss Pink wrote word of the engagement to Moody first; reserving to a
later day the superior pleasure of informing Lady Lydiard of the very
event which that audacious woman had declared to be impossible. To her
aunt’s surprise, just as she was about to close the envelope Isabel
stepped forward, and inconsistently requested leave to add a postscript
to the very letter which she had refused to write! Miss Pink was not
even permitted to see the postscript. Isabel secured the envelope the
moment she laid down her pen, and retired to her room with a headache
(which was heartache in disguise) for the rest of the day.

While the question of marriage was still in debate, an event occurred
which exercised a serious influence on Hardyman’s future plans.

He received a letter from the Continent which claimed his immediate
attention. One of the sovereigns of Europe had decided on making some
radical changes in the mounting and equipment of a cavalry regiment;
and he required the assistance of Hardyman in that important part of the
contemplated reform which was connected with the choice and purchase
of horses. Setting his own interests out of the question, Hardyman owed
obligations to the kindness of his illustrious correspondent which made
it impossible for him to send an excuse. In a fortnight’s time, at the
latest, it would be necessary for him to leave England; and a month or
more might elapse before it would be possible for him to return.

Under these circumstances, he proposed, in his own precipitate way, to
hasten the date of the marriage. The necessary legal delay would permit
the ceremony to be performed on that day fortnight. Isabel might then
accompany him on his journey, and spend a brilliant honeymoon at the
foreign Court. She at once refused, not only to accept his proposal, but
even to take it into consideration. While Miss Pink dwelt eloquently on
the shortness of the notice, Miss Pink’s niece based her resolution
on far more important grounds. Hardyman had not yet announced the
contemplated marriage to his parents and friends; and Isabel was
determined not to become his wife until she could be first assured of a
courteous and tolerant reception by the family--if she could hope for no
warmer welcome at their hands.

Hardyman was not a man who yielded easily, even in trifles. In the
present case, his dearest interests were concerned in inducing Isabel
to reconsider her decision. He was still vainly trying to shake her
resolution, when the afternoon post brought a letter for Miss Pink which
introduced a new element of disturbance into the discussion. The letter
was nothing less than Lady Lydiard’s reply to the written announcement
of Isabel’s engagement, despatched on the previous day by Miss Pink.

Her Ladyship’s answer was a surprisingly short one. It only contained
these lines:

“Lady Lydiard begs to acknowledge the receipt of Miss Pink’s letter
requesting that she will say nothing to Mr. Hardyman of the loss of
a bank-note in her house, and, assigning as a reason that Miss Isabel
Miller is engaged to be married to Mr. Hardyman, and might be prejudiced
in his estimation if the facts were made known. Miss Pink may make her
mind easy. Lady Lydiard had not the slightest intention of taking Mr.
Hardyman into her confidence on the subject of her domestic affairs.
With regard to the proposed marriage, Lady Lydiard casts no doubt on
Miss Pink’s perfect sincerity and good faith; but, at the same time,
she positively declines to believe that Mr. Hardyman means to make
Miss Isabel Miller his wife. Lady L. will yield to the evidence of a
properly-attested certificate--and to nothing else.”


A folded piece of paper, directed to Isabel, dropped out of this
characteristic letter as Miss Pink turned from the first page to the
second. Lady Lydiard addressed her adopted daughter in these words:

“I was on the point of leaving home to visit you again, when I received
your aunt’s letter. My poor deluded child, no words can tell how
distressed I am about you. You are already sacrificed to the folly of
the most foolish woman living. For God’s sake, take care you do not fall
a victim next to the designs of a profligate man. Come to me instantly,
Isabel, and I promise to take care of you.”

Fortified by these letters, and aided by Miss Pink’s indignation,
Hardyman pressed his proposal on Isabel with renewed resolution. She
made no attempt to combat his arguments--she only held firmly to her
decision. Without some encouragement from Hardyman’s father and mother
she still steadily refused to become his wife. Irritated already by
Lady Lydiard’s letters, he lost the self-command which so eminently
distinguished him in the ordinary affairs of life, and showed the
domineering and despotic temper which was an inbred part of his
disposition. Isabel’s high spirit at once resented the harsh terms in
which he spoke to her. In the plainest words, she released him from his
engagement, and, without waiting for his excuses, quitted the room.

Left together, Hardyman and Miss Pink devised an arrangement which
paid due respect to Isabel’s scruples, and at the same time met Lady
Lydiard’s insulting assertion of disbelief in Hardyman’s honor, by a
formal and public announcement of the marriage.

It was proposed to give a garden party at the farm in a week’s time
for the express purpose of introducing Isabel to Hardyman’s family and
friends in the character of his betrothed wife. If his father and mother
accepted the invitation, Isabel’s only objection to hastening the union
would fall to the ground. Hardyman might, in that case, plead with his
Imperial correspondent for a delay in his departure of a few days more;
and the marriage might still take place before he left England. Isabel,
at Miss Pink’s intercession, was induced to accept her lover’s excuses,
and, in the event of her favorable reception by Hardyman’s parents at
the farm, to give her consent (not very willingly even yet) to hastening
the ceremony which was to make her Hardyman’s wife.

On the next morning the whole of the invitations were sent out,
excepting the invitation to Hardyman’s father and mother. Without
mentioning it to Isabel, Hardyman decided on personally appealing to
his mother before he ventured on taking the head of the family into his
confidence.

The result of the interview was partially successful--and no more. Lord
Rotherfield declined to see his youngest son; and he had engagements
which would, under any circumstances, prevent his being present at the
garden party. But at the express request of Lady Rotherfield, he was
willing to make certain concessions.

“I have always regarded Alfred as a barely sane person,” said his
Lordship, “since he turned his back on his prospects to become a horse
dealer. If we decline altogether to sanction this new act--I won’t say,
of insanity, I will say, of absurdity--on his part, it is impossible to
predict to what discreditable extremities he may not proceed. We must
temporise with Alfred. In the meantime I shall endeavor to obtain some
information respecting this young person--named Miller, I think you
said, and now resident at South Morden. If I am satisfied that she is
a woman of reputable character, possessing an average education and
presentable manners, we may as well let Alfred take his own way. He is
out of the pale of Society, as it is; and Miss Miller has no father and
mother to complicate matters, which is distinctly a merit on her part
and, in short, if the marriage is not absolutely disgraceful, the wisest
way (as we have no power to prevent it) will be to submit. You will say
nothing to Alfred about what I propose to do. I tell you plainly I
don’t trust him. You will simply inform him from me that I want time to
consider, and that, unless he hears to the contrary in the interval, he
may expect to have the sanction of your presence at his breakfast, or
luncheon, or whatever it is. I must go to town in a day or two, and I
shall ascertain what Alfred’s friends know about this last of his many
follies, if I meet any of them at the club.”

Returning to South Morden in no serene frame of mind, Hardyman found
Isabel in a state of depression which perplexed and alarmed him.

The news that his mother might be expected to be present at the garden
party failed entirely to raise her spirits. The only explanation she
gave of the change in her was, that the dull heavy weather of the
last few days made her feel a little languid and nervous. Naturally
dissatisfied with this reply to his inquiries, Hardyman asked for
Miss Pink. He was informed that Miss Pink could not see him. She was
constitutionally subject to asthma, and, having warnings of the return
of the malady, she was (by the doctor’s advice) keeping her room.
Hardyman returned to the farm in a temper which was felt by everybody in
his employment, from the trainer to the stable-boys.

While the apology made for Miss Pink stated no more than the plain
truth, it must be confessed that Hardyman was right in declining to be
satisfied with Isabel’s excuse for the melancholy that oppressed her.
She had that morning received Moody’s answer to the lines which she had
addressed to him at the end of her aunt’s letter; and she had not yet
recovered from the effect which it had produced on her spirits.

“It is impossible for me to say honestly that I am not distressed (Moody
wrote) by the news of your marriage engagement. The blow has fallen very
heavily on me. When I look at the future now, I see only a dreary blank.
This is not your fault--you are in no way to blame. I remember the time
when I should have been too angry to own this--when I might have said or
done things which I should have bitterly repented afterwards. That time
is past. My temper has been softened, since I have befriended you in
your troubles. That good at least has come out of my foolish hopes,
and perhaps out of the true sympathy which I have felt for you. I
can honestly ask you to accept my heart’s dearest wishes for your
happiness--and I can keep the rest to myself.

“Let me say a word now relating to the efforts that I have made to help
you, since that sad day when you left Lady Lydiard’s house.

“I had hoped (for reasons which it is needless to mention here) to
interest Mr. Hardyman himself in aiding our inquiry. But your aunt’s
wishes, as expressed in her letter to me, close my lips. I will only
beg you, at some convenient time, to let me mention the last discoveries
that we have made; leaving it to your discretion, when Mr. Hardyman
has become your husband, to ask him the questions which, under other
circumstances, I should have put to him myself.

“It is, of course, possible that the view I take of Mr. Hardyman’s
capacity to help us may be a mistaken one. In this case, if you still
wish the investigation to be privately carried on, I entreat you to let
me continue to direct it, as the greatest favor you can confer on your
devoted old friend.

“You need be under no apprehension about the expense to which you are
likely to put me. I have unexpectedly inherited what is to me a handsome
fortune.

“The same post which brought your aunt’s letter brought a line from a
lawyer asking me to see him on the subject of my late father’s affairs.
I waited a day or two before I could summon heart enough to see him, or
to see anybody; and then I went to his office. You have heard that
my father’s bank stopped payment, at a time of commercial panic. His
failure was mainly attributable to the treachery of a friend to whom
he had lent a large sum of money, and who paid him the yearly interest,
without acknowledging that every farthing of it had been lost in
unsuccessful speculations. The son of this man has prospered in
business, and he has honorably devoted a part of his wealth to the
payment of his father’s creditors. Half the sum due to _my_ father has
thus passed into my hands as his next of kin; and the other half is to
follow in course of time. If my hopes had been fulfilled, how gladly
I should have shared my prosperity with you! As it is, I have far more
than enough for my wants as a lonely man, and plenty left to spend in
your service.

“God bless and prosper you, my dear. I shall ask you to accept a little
present from me, among the other offerings that are made to you before
the wedding day.--R.M.”


The studiously considerate and delicate tone in which these lines were
written had an effect on Isabel which was exactly the opposite of the
effect intended by the writer. She burst into a passionate fit of tears;
and in the safe solitude of her own room, the despairing words escaped
her, “I wish I had died before I met with Alfred Hardyman!”

As the days wore on, disappointments and difficulties seemed by a kind
of fatality to beset the contemplated announcement of the marriage.

Miss Pink’s asthma, developed by the unfavorable weather, set the
doctor’s art at defiance, and threatened to keep that unfortunate lady
a prisoner in her room on the day of the party. Hardyman’s invitations
were in some cases refused; and in others accepted by husbands with
excuses for the absence of their wives. His elder brother made an
apology for himself as well as for his wife. Felix Sweetsir wrote, “With
pleasure, dear Alfred, if my health permits me to leave the house.” Lady
Lydiard, invited at Miss Pink’s special request, sent no reply. The one
encouraging circumstance was the silence of Lady Rotherfield. So long as
her son received no intimation to the contrary, it was a sign that Lord
Rotherfield permitted his wife to sanction the marriage by her presence.

Hardyman wrote to his Imperial correspondent, engaging to leave England
on the earliest possible day, and asking to be pardoned if he failed to
express himself more definitely, in consideration of domestic affairs,
which it was necessary to settle before he started for the Continent.
If there should not be time enough to write again, he promised to send
a telegraphic announcement of his departure. Long afterwards, Hardyman
remembered the misgivings that had troubled him when he wrote that
letter. In the rough draught of it, he had mentioned, as his excuse
for not being yet certain of his own movements, that he expected to
be immediately married. In the fair copy, the vague foreboding of some
accident to come was so painfully present to his mind, that he struck
out the words which referred to his marriage, and substituted the
designedly indefinite phrase, “domestic affairs.”




CHAPTER XX.

THE day of the garden party arrived. There was no rain; but the air was
heavy, and the sky was overcast by lowering clouds.

Some hours before the guests were expected, Isabel arrived alone at
the farm, bearing the apologies of unfortunate Miss Pink, still kept a
prisoner in her bed-chamber by the asthma. In the confusion produced at
the cottage by the preparations for entertaining the company, the one
room in which Hardyman could receive Isabel with the certainty of not
being interrupted was the smoking-room. To this haven of refuge he led
her--still reserved and silent, still not restored to her customary
spirits. “If any visitors come before the time,” Hardyman said to his
servant, “tell them I am engaged at the stables. I must have an hour’s
quiet talk with you,” he continued, turning to Isabel, “or I shall be in
too bad a temper to receive my guests with common politeness. The worry
of giving this party is not to be told in words. I almost wish I had
been content with presenting you to my mother, and had let the rest of
my acquaintances go to the devil.”

A quiet half hour passed; and the first visitor, a stranger to the
servants, appeared at the cottage-gate. He was a middle-aged man, and
he had no wish to disturb Mr. Hardyman. “I will wait in the grounds,” he
said, “and trouble nobody.” The middle-aged man, who expressed himself
in these modest terms, was Robert Moody.

Five minutes later, a carriage drove up to the gate. An elderly lady got
out of it, followed by a fat white Scotch terrier, who growled at every
stranger within his reach. It is needless to introduce Lady Lydiard and
Tommie.

Informed that Mr. Hardyman was at the stables, Lady Lydiard gave the
servant her card. “Take that to your master, and say I won’t detain
him five minutes.” With these words, her Ladyship sauntered into the
grounds. She looked about her with observant eyes; not only noticing
the tent which had been set up on the grass to accommodate the expected
guests, but entering it, and looking at the waiters who were engaged
in placing the luncheon on the table. Returning to the outer world, she
next remarked that Mr. Hardyman’s lawn was in very bad order. Barren
sun-dried patches, and little holes and crevices opened here and
there by the action of the summer heat, announced that the lawn, like
everything else at the farm, had been neglected, in the exclusive
attention paid to the claims of the horses. Reaching a shrubbery which
bounded one side of the grounds next, her Ladyship became aware of a man
slowly approaching her, to all appearance absorbed in thought. The
man drew a little nearer. She lifted her glasses to her eyes and
recognized--Moody.

No embarrassment was produced on either side by this unexpected meeting.
Lady Lydiard had, not long since, sent to ask her former steward to
visit her; regretting, in her warm-hearted way, the terms on which they
had separated, and wishing to atone for the harsh language that had
escaped her at their parting interview. In the friendly talk which
followed the reconciliation, Lady Lydiard not only heard the news
of Moody’s pecuniary inheritance--but, noticing the change in his
appearance for the worse, contrived to extract from him the confession
of his ill-starred passion for Isabel. To discover him now, after all
that he had acknowledged, walking about the grounds at Hardyman’s farm,
took her Ladyship completely by surprise. “Good Heavens!” she exclaimed,
in her loudest tones, “what are you doing here?”

“You mentioned Mr. Hardyman’s garden party, my Lady, when I had the
honor of waiting on you,” Moody answered. “Thinking over it afterward,
it seemed the fittest occasion I could find for making a little wedding
present to Miss Isabel. Is there any harm in my asking Mr. Hardyman to
let me put the present on her plate, so that she may see it when she
sits down to luncheon? If your Ladyship thinks so, I will go away
directly, and send the gift by post.”

Lady Lydiard looked at him attentively. “You don’t despise the girl,”
 she asked, “for selling herself for rank and money? I do--I can tell
you!”

Moody’s worn white face flushed a little. “No, my Lady,” he answered,
“I can’t hear you say that! Isabel would not have engaged herself to Mr.
Hardyman unless she had been fond of him--as fond, I dare say, as I once
hoped she might be of me. It’s a hard thing to confess that; but I do
confess it, in justice to her--God bless her!”

The generosity that spoke in those simple words touched the finest
sympathies in Lady Lydiard’s nature. “Give me your hand,” she said, with
her own generous spirit kindling in her eyes. “You have a great heart,
Moody. Isabel Miller is a fool for not marrying _you_--and one day she
will know it!”

Before a word more could pass between them, Hardyman’s voice was audible
on the other side of the shrubbery, calling irritably to his servant to
find Lady Lydiard.

Moody retired to the further end of the walk, while Lady Lydiard
advanced in the opposite direction, so as to meet Hardyman at the
entrance to the shrubbery. He bowed stiffly, and begged to know why her
Ladyship had honored him with a visit.

Lady Lydiard replied without noticing the coldness of her reception.

“I have not been very well, Mr. Hardyman, or you would have seen me
before this. My only object in presenting myself here is to make my
excuses personally for having written of you in terms which expressed
a doubt of your honor. I have done you an injustice, and I beg you to
forgive me.”

Hardyman acknowledged this frank apology as unreservedly as it had been
offered to him. “Say no more, Lady Lydiard. And let me hope, now you are
here, that you will honor my little party with your presence.”

Lady Lydiard gravely stated her reasons for not accepting the
invitation.

“I disapprove so strongly of unequal marriages,” she said, walking
on slowly towards the cottage, “that I cannot, in common consistency,
become one of your guests. I shall always feel interested in Isabel
Miller’s welfare; and I can honestly say I shall be glad if your married
life proves that my old-fashioned prejudices are without justification
in your case. Accept my thanks for your invitation; and let me hope that
my plain speaking has not offended you.”

She bowed, and looked about her for Tommie before she advanced to the
carriage waiting for her at the gate. In the surprise of seeing
Moody she had forgotten to look back for the dog when she entered
the shrubbery. She now called to him, and blew the whistle at her
watch-chain. Not a sign of Tommie was to be seen. Hardyman instantly
directed the servants to search in the cottage and out of the cottage
for the dog. The order was obeyed with all needful activity and
intelligence, and entirely without success. For the time being at any
rate, Tommie was lost.

Hardyman promised to have the dog looked for in every part of the farm,
and to send him back in the care of one of his own men. With these
polite assurances Lady Lydiard was obliged to be satisfied. She drove
away in a very despondent frame of mind. “First Isabel, and now Tommie,”
 thought her Ladyship. “I am losing the only companions who made life
tolerable to me.”

Returning from the garden gate, after taking leave of his visitor,
Hardyman received from his servant a handful of letters which had just
arrived for him. Walking slowly over the lawn as he opened them, he
found nothing but excuses for the absence of guests who had already
accepted their invitations. He had just thrust the letters into his
pocket, when he heard footsteps behind him, and, looking round, found
himself confronted by Moody.

“Hullo! have you come to lunch?” Hardyman asked, roughly.

“I have come here, sir, with a little gift for Miss Isabel, in honor of
her marriage,” Moody answered quietly, “and I ask your permission to
put it on the table, so that she may see it when your guests sit down to
luncheon.”

He opened a jeweler’s case as he spoke, containing a plain gold bracelet
with an inscription engraved on the inner side: “To Miss Isabel Miller,
with the sincere good wishes of Robert Moody.”

Plain as it was, the design of the bracelet was unusually beautiful.
Hardyman had noticed Moody’s agitation on the day when he had met Isabel
near her aunt’s house, and had drawn his own conclusions from it. His
face darkened with a momentary jealousy as he looked at the bracelet.
“All right, old fellow!” he said, with contemptuous familiarity. “Don’t
be modest. Wait and give it to her with your own hand.”

“No, sir,” said Moody “I would rather leave it, if you please, to speak
for itself.”

Hardyman understood the delicacy of feeling which dictated those words,
and, without well knowing why, resented it. He was on the point of
speaking, under the influence of this unworthy motive, when Isabel’s
voice reached his ears, calling to him from the cottage.

Moody’s face contracted with a sudden expression of pain as he, too,
recognized the voice. “Don’t let me detain you, sir,” he said, sadly.
“Good-morning!”

Hardyman left him without ceremony. Moody, slowly following, entered the
tent. All the preparations for the luncheon had been completed; nobody
was there. The places to be occupied by the guests were indicated
by cards bearing their names. Moody found Isabel’s card, and put his
bracelet inside the folded napkin on her plate. For a while he stood
with his hand on the table, thinking. The temptation to communicate once
more with Isabel before he lost her forever, was fast getting the better
of his powers of resistance.

“If I could persuade her to write a word to say she liked her bracelet,”
 he thought, “it would be a comfort when I go back to my solitary life.”
 He tore a leaf out of his pocket book and wrote on it, “One line to say
you accept my gift and my good wishes. Put it under the cushion of your
chair, and I shall find it when the company have left the tent.” He
slipped the paper into the case which held the bracelet, and instead of
leaving the farm as he had intended, turned back to the shelter of the
shrubbery.




CHAPTER XXI.

HARDYMAN went on to the cottage. He found Isabel in some agitation.
And there, by her side, with his tail wagging slowly, and his eye on
Hardyman in expectation of a possible kick--there was the lost Tommie!

“Has Lady Lydiard gone?” Isabel asked eagerly.

“Yes,” said Hardyman. “Where did you find the dog?”

As events had ordered it, the dog had found Isabel, under these
circumstances.

The appearance of Lady Lydiard’s card in the smoking-room had been an
alarming event for Lady Lydiard’s adopted daughter. She was guiltily
conscious of not having answered her Ladyship’s note, inclosed in
Miss Pink’s letter, and of not having taken her Ladyship’s advice in
regulating her conduct towards Hardyman. As he rose to leave the room
and receive his visitor in the grounds, Isabel begged him to say nothing
of her presence at the farm, unless Lady Lydiard exhibited a forgiving
turn of mind by asking to see her. Left by herself in the smoking-room,
she suddenly heard a bark in the passage which had a familiar sound in
her ears. She opened the door--and in rushed Tommie, with one of his
shrieks of delight! Curiosity had taken him into the house. He had heard
the voices in the smoking-room; had recognized Isabel’s voice; and
had waited, with his customary cunning and his customary distrust of
strangers, until Hardyman was out of the way. Isabel kissed and caressed
him, and then drove him out again to the lawn, fearing that Lady Lydiard
might return to look for him. Going back to the smoking-room, she stood
at the window watching for Hardyman’s return. When the servants came to
look for the dog, she could only tell them that she had last seen him
in the grounds, not far from the cottage. The useless search being
abandoned, and the carriage having left the gate, who should crawl out
from the back of a cupboard in which some empty hampers were placed but
Tommie himself! How he had contrived to get back to the smoking-room
(unless she had omitted to completely close the door on her return) it
was impossible to say. But there he was, determined this time to stay
with Isabel, and keeping in his hiding place until he heard the movement
of the carriage-wheels, which informed him that his lawful mistress had
left the cottage! Isabel had at once called Hardyman, on the chance
that the carriage might yet be stopped. It was already out of sight, and
nobody knew which of two roads it had taken, both leading to London. In
this emergency, Isabel could only look at Hardyman and ask what was to
be done.

“I can’t spare a servant till after the party,” he answered. “The dog
must be tied up in the stables.”

Isabel shook her head. Tommie was not accustomed to be tied up. He would
make a disturbance, and he would be beaten by the grooms. “I will take
care of him,” she said. “He won’t leave me.”

“There’s something else to think of besides the dog,” Hardyman rejoined
irritably. “Look at these letters!” He pulled them out of his pocket as
he spoke. “Here are no less than seven men, all calling themselves my
friends, who accepted my invitation, and who write to excuse themselves
on the very day of the party. Do you know why? They’re all afraid of my
father--I forgot to tell you he’s a Cabinet Minister as well as a Lord.
Cowards and cads. They have heard he isn’t coming and they think to
curry favor with the great man by stopping away. Come along, Isabel!
Let’s take their names off the luncheon table. Not a man of them shall
ever darken my doors again!”

“I am to blame for what has happened,” Isabel answered sadly. “I am
estranging you from your friends. There is still time, Alfred, to alter
your mind and let me go.”

He put his arm round her with rough fondness. “I would sacrifice every
friend I have in the world rather than lose you. Come along!”

They left the cottage. At the entrance to the tent, Hardyman noticed
the dog at Isabel’s heels, and vented his ill-temper, as usual with male
humanity, on the nearest unoffending creature that he could find. “Be
off, you mongrel brute!” he shouted. The tail of Tommie relaxed from its
customary tight curve over the small of his back; and the legs of Tommie
(with his tail between them) took him at full gallop to the friendly
shelter of the cupboard in the smoking-room. It was one of those
trifling circumstances which women notice seriously. Isabel said
nothing; she only thought to herself, “I wish he had shown his temper
when I first knew him!”

They entered the tent.

“I’ll read the names,” said Hardyman, “and you find the cards and tear
them up. Stop! I’ll keep the cards. You’re just the sort of woman my
father likes. He’ll be reconciled to me when he sees you, after we are
married. If one of those men ever asks him for a place, I’ll take
care, if it’s years hence, to put an obstacle in his way! Here; take my
pencil, and make a mark on the cards to remind me; the same mark I set
against a horse in my book when I don’t like him--a cross, inclosed in a
circle.” He produced his pocketbook. His hands trembled with anger as
he gave the pencil to Isabel and laid the book on the table. He had just
read the name of the first false friend, and Isabel had just found
the card, when a servant appeared with a message. “Mrs. Drumblade
has arrived, sir, and wishes to see you on a matter of the greatest
importance.”

Hardyman left the tent, not very willingly. “Wait here,” he said to
Isabel; “I’ll be back directly.”

She was standing near her own place at the table. Moody had left one
end of the jeweler’s case visible above the napkin, to attract her
attention. In a minute more the bracelet and note were in her hands. She
dropped on her chair, overwhelmed by the conflicting emotions that rose
in her at the sight of the bracelet, at the reading of the note. Her
head drooped, and the tears filled her eyes. “Are all women as blind
as I have been to what is good and noble in the men who love them?” she
wondered, sadly. “Better as it is,” she thought, with a bitter sigh; “I
am not worthy of him.”

As she took up the pencil to write her answer to Moody on the back of
her dinner-card, the servant appeared again at the door of the tent.

“My master wants you at the cottage, miss, immediately.”

Isabel rose, putting the bracelet and the note in the silver-mounted
leather pocket (a present from Hardyman) which hung at her belt. In the
hurry of passing round the table to get out, she never noticed that her
dress touched Hardyman’s pocketbook, placed close to the edge, and threw
it down on the grass below. The book fell into one of the heat cracks
which Lady Lydiard had noticed as evidence of the neglected condition of
the cottage lawn.

“You ought to hear the pleasant news my sister has just brought me,”
 said Hardyman, when Isabel joined him in the parlor. “Mrs. Drumblade has
been told, on the best authority, that my mother is not coming to the
party.”

“There must be some reason, of course, dear Isabel,” added Mrs.
Drumblade. “Have you any idea of what it can be? I haven’t seen my
mother myself; and all my inquiries have failed to find it out.”

She looked searchingly at Isabel as she spoke. The mask of sympathy on
her face was admirably worn. Nobody who possessed only a superficial
acquaintance with Mrs. Drumblade’s character would have suspected how
thoroughly she was enjoying in secret the position of embarrassment in
which her news had placed her brother. Instinctively doubting whether
Mrs. Drumblade’s friendly behavior was quite as sincere as it appeared
to be, Isabel answered that she was a stranger to Lady Rotherfield, and
was therefore quite at a loss to explain the cause of her ladyship’s
absence. As she spoke, the guests began to arrive in quick succession,
and the subject was dropped as a matter of course.

It was not a merry party. Hardyman’s approaching marriage had been made
the topic of much malicious gossip, and Isabel’s character had, as usual
in such cases, become the object of all the false reports that
scandal could invent. Lady Rotherfield’s absence confirmed the general
conviction that Hardyman was disgracing himself. The men were all
more or less uneasy. The women resented the discovery that Isabel
was--personally speaking, at least--beyond the reach of hostile
criticism. Her beauty was viewed as a downright offense; her refined and
modest manners were set down as perfect acting; “really disgusting,
my dear, in so young a girl.” General Drumblade, a large and mouldy
veteran, in a state of chronic astonishment (after his own matrimonial
experience) at Hardyman’s folly in marrying at all, diffused a wide
circle of gloom, wherever he went and whatever he did. His accomplished
wife, forcing her high spirits on everybody’s attention with a sort of
kittenish playfulness, intensified the depressing effect of the general
dullness by all the force of the strongest contrast. After waiting half
an hour for his mother, and waiting in vain, Hardyman led the way to the
tent in despair. “The sooner I fill their stomachs and get rid of them,”
 he thought savagely, “the better I shall be pleased!”

The luncheon was attacked by the company with a certain silent ferocity,
which the waiters noticed as remarkable, even in their large experience.
The men drank deeply, but with wonderfully little effect in raising
their spirits; the women, with the exception of amiable Mrs. Drumblade,
kept Isabel deliberately out of the conversation that went on among
them. General Drumblade, sitting next to her in one of the places of
honor, discoursed to Isabel privately on “my brother-in-law Hardyman’s
infernal temper.” A young marquis, on her other side--a mere lad,
chosen to make the necessary speech in acknowledgment of his superior
rank--rose, in a state of nervous trepidation, to propose Isabel’s
health as the chosen bride of their host. Pale and trembling, conscious
of having forgotten the words which he had learnt beforehand, this
unhappy young nobleman began: “Ladies and gentlemen, I haven’t an
idea--” He stopped, put his hand to his head, stared wildly, and sat
down again; having contrived to state his own case with masterly brevity
and perfect truth, in a speech of seven words.

While the dismay, in some cases, and the amusement in others, was still
at its height, Hardyman’s valet made his appearance, and, approaching
his master, said in a whisper, “Could I speak to you, sit, for a moment
outside?”

“What the devil do you want?” Hardyman asked irritably. “Is that a
letter in your hand? Give it to me.”

The valet was a Frenchman. In other words, he had a sense of what was
due to himself. His master had forgotten this. He gave up the letter
with a certain dignity of manner, and left the tent. Hardyman opened the
letter. He turned pale as he read it; crumpled it in his hand, and threw
it down on the table. “By G--d! it’s a lie!” he exclaimed furiously.

The guests rose in confusion. Mrs. Drumblade, finding the letter within
her reach, coolly possessed herself of it; recognized her mother’s
handwriting; and read these lines:

“I have only now succeeded in persuading your father to let me write
to you. For God’s sake, break off your marriage at any sacrifice. Your
father has heard, on unanswerable authority, that Miss Isabel Miller
left her situation in Lady Lydiard’s house on suspicion of theft.”

While his sister was reading this letter, Hardyman had made his way to
Isabel’s chair. “I must speak to you, directly,” he whispered. “Come
away with me!” He turned, as he took her arm, and looked at the table.
“Where is my letter?” he asked. Mrs. Drumblade handed it to him,
dexterously crumpled up again as she had found it. “No bad news, dear
Alfred, I hope?” she said, in her most affectionate manner. Hardyman
snatched the letter from her, without answering, and led Isabel out of
the tent.

“Read that!” he said, when they were alone. “And tell me at once whether
it’s true or false.”

Isabel read the letter. For a moment the shock of the discovery held her
speechless. She recovered herself, and returned the letter.

“It is true,” she answered.

Hardyman staggered back as if she had shot him.

“True that you are guilty?” he asked.

“No; I am innocent. Everybody who knows me believes in my innocence.
It is true the appearances were against me. They are against me still.”
 Having said this, she waited, quietly and firmly, for his next words.

He passed his hand over his forehead with a sigh of relief. “It’s bad
enough as it is,” he said, speaking quietly on his side. “But the remedy
for it is plain enough. Come back to the tent.”

She never moved. “Why?” she asked.

“Do you suppose I don’t believe in your innocence too?” he answered.
“The one way of setting you right with the world now is for me to make
you my wife, in spite of the appearances that point to you. I’m too fond
of you, Isabel, to give you up. Come back with me, and I will announce
our marriage to my friends.”

She took his hand, and kissed it. “It is generous and good of you,” she
said; “but it must not be.”

He took a step nearer to her. “What do you mean?” he asked.

“It was against my will,” she pursued, “that my aunt concealed the truth
from you. I did wrong to consent to it, I will do wrong no more. Your
mother is right, Alfred. After what has happened, I am not fit to be
your wife until my innocence is proved. It is not proved yet.”

The angry color began to rise in his face once more. “Take care,” he
said; “I am not in a humor to be trifled with.”

“I am not trifling with you,” she answered, in low, sad tones.

“You really mean what you say?”

“I mean it.”

“Don’t be obstinate, Isabel. Take time to consider.”

“You are very kind, Alfred. My duty is plain to me. I will marry you--if
you still wish it--when my good name is restored to me. Not before.”

He laid one hand on her arm, and pointed with the other to the guests in
the distance, all leaving the tent on the way to their carriages.

“Your good name will be restored to you,” he said, “on the day when I
make you my wife. The worst enemy you have cannot associate _my_ name
with a suspicion of theft. Remember that and think a little before you
decide. You see those people there. If you don’t change your mind by the
time they have got to the cottage, it’s good-by between us, and good-by
forever. I refuse to wait for you; I refuse to accept a conditional
engagement. Wait, and think. They’re walking slowly; you have got some
minutes more.”

He still held her arm, watching the guests as they gradually receded
from view. It was not until they had all collected in a group outside
the cottage door that he spoke himself, or that he permitted Isabel to
speak again.

“Now,” he said, “you have had your time to get cool. Will you take my
arm, and join those people with me? or will you say good-by forever?”

“Forgive me, Alfred!” she began, gently. “I cannot consent, in justice
to you, to shelter myself behind your name. It is the name of your
family; and they have a right to expect that you will not degrade it--”

“I want a plain answer,” he interposed sternly. “Which is it? Yes, or
No?”

She looked at him with sad compassionate eyes. Her voice was firm as she
answered him in one word as he had desired. The word was--

“No.”

Without speaking to her, without even looking at her, he turned and
walked back to the cottage.

Making his way silently through the group of visitors--every one of whom
had been informed of what had happened by his sister--with his head down
and his lips fast closed, he entered the parlor and rang the bell which
communicated with his foreman’s rooms at the stables.

“You know that I am going abroad on business?” he said, when the man
appeared.

“Yes, sir.”

“I am going to-day--going by the night train to Dover. Order the horse
to be put to instantly in the dogcart. Is there anything wanted before I
am off?”

The inexorable necessities of business asserted their claims through
the obedient medium of the foreman. Chafing at the delay, Hardyman was
obliged to sit at his desk, signing checks and passing accounts, with
the dogcart waiting in the stable yard.

A knock at the door startled him in the middle of his work. “Come in,”
 he called out sharply.

He looked up, expecting to see one of the guests or one of the servants.
It was Moody who entered the room. Hardyman laid down his pen, and fixed
his eyes sternly on the man who had dared to interrupt him.

“What the devil do _you_ want?” he asked.

“I have seen Miss Isabel, and spoken with her,” Moody replied. “Mr.
Hardyman, I believe it is in your power to set this matter right. For
the young lady’s sake, sir, you must not leave England without doing
it.”

Hardyman turned to his foreman. “Is this fellow mad or drunk?” he asked.

Moody proceeded as calmly and as resolutely as if those words had not
been spoken. “I apologize for my intrusion, sir. I will trouble you with
no explanations. I will only ask one question. Have you a memorandum of
the number of that five-hundred pound note you paid away in France?”

Hardyman lost all control over himself.

“You scoundrel!” he cried, “have you been prying into my private
affairs? Is it _your_ business to know what I did in France?”

“Is it _your_ vengeance on a woman to refuse to tell her the number of a
bank-note?” Moody rejoined, firmly.

That answer forced its way, through Hardyman’s anger, to Hardyman’s
sense of honor. He rose and advanced to Moody. For a moment the two men
faced each other in silence. “You’re a bold fellow,” said Hardyman, with
a sudden change from anger to irony. “I’ll do the lady justice. I’ll
look at my pocketbook.”

He put his hand into the breast-pocket of his coat; he searched his
other pockets; he turned over the objects on his writing-table. The book
was gone.

Moody watched him with a feeling of despair. “Oh! Mr. Hardyman, don’t
say you have lost your pocketbook!”

He sat down again at his desk, with sullen submission to the new
disaster. “All I can say is you’re at liberty to look for it,” he
replied. “I must have dropped it somewhere.” He turned impatiently to
the foreman, “Now then! What is the next check wanted? I shall go mad if
I wait in this damned place much longer!”

Moody left him, and found his way to the servants’ offices. “Mr.
Hardyman has lost his pocketbook,” he said. “Look for it, indoors and
out--on the lawn, and in the tent. Ten pounds reward for the man who
finds it!”

Servants and waiters instantly dispersed, eager for the promised reward.
The men who pursued the search outside the cottage divided their forces.
Some of them examined the lawn and the flower-beds. Others went straight
to the empty tent. These last were too completely absorbed in pursuing
the object in view to notice that they disturbed a dog, eating a stolen
lunch of his own from the morsels left on the plates. The dog slunk away
under the canvas when the men came in, waited in hiding until they had
gone, then returned to the tent, and went on with his luncheon.

Moody hastened back to the part of the grounds (close to the shrubbery)
in which Isabel was waiting his return.

She looked at him, while he was telling her of his interview with
Hardyman, with an expression in her eyes which he had never seen in them
before--an expression which set his heart beating wildly, and made him
break off in his narrative before he had reached the end.

“I understand,” she said quietly, as he stopped in confusion. “You have
made one more sacrifice to my welfare. Robert! I believe you are the
noblest man that ever breathed the breath of life!”

His eyes sank before hers; he blushed like a boy. “I have done nothing
for you yet,” he said. “Don’t despair of the future, if the pocketbook
should not be found. I know who the man is who received the bank note;
and I have only to find him to decide the question whether it _is_ the
stolen note or not.”

She smiled sadly as his enthusiasm. “Are you going back to Mr. Sharon to
help you?” she asked. “That trick he played me has destroyed _my_ belief
in him. He no more knows than I do who the thief really is.”

“You are mistaken, Isabel. He knows--and I know.” He stopped there, and
made a sign to her to be silent. One of the servants was approaching
them.

“Is the pocketbook found?” Moody asked.

“No, sir.”

“Has Mr. Hardyman left the cottage?”

“He has just gone, sir. Have you any further instructions to give us?”

“No. There is my address in London, if the pocketbook should be found.”

The man took the card that was handed to him and retired. Moody offered
his arm to Isabel. “I am at your service,” he said, “when you wish to
return to your aunt.”

They had advanced nearly as far as the tent, on their way out of the
grounds, when they were met by a gentleman walking towards them from the
cottage. He was a stranger to Isabel. Moody immediately recognized him
as Mr. Felix Sweetsir.

“Ha! our good Moody!” cried Felix. “Enviable man! you look younger than
ever.” He took off his hat to Isabel; his bright restless eyes suddenly
became quiet as they rested on her. “Have I the honor of addressing
the future Mrs. Hardyman? May I offer my best congratulations? What has
become of our friend Alfred?”

Moody answered for Isabel. “If you will make inquiries at the cottage,
sir,” he said, “you will find that you are mistaken, to say the least of
it, in addressing your questions to this young lady.”

Felix took off his hat again--with the most becoming appearance of
surprise and distress.

“Something wrong, I fear?” he said, addressing Isabel. “I am, indeed,
ashamed if I have ignorantly given you a moment’s pain. Pray accept
my most sincere apologies. I have only this instant arrived; my health
would not allow me to be present at the luncheon. Permit me to express
the earnest hope that matters may be set right to the satisfaction of
all parties. Good-afternoon!”

He bowed with elaborate courtesy, and turned back to the cottage.

“Who is that?” Isabel asked.

“Lady Lydiard’s nephew, Mr. Felix Sweetsir,” Moody answered, with
a sudden sternness of tone, and a sudden coldness of manner, which
surprised Isabel.

“You don’t like him?” she said.

As she spoke, Felix stopped to give audience to one of the grooms, who
had apparently been sent with a message to him. He turned so that
his face was once more visible to Isabel. Moody pressed her hand
significantly as it rested on his arm.

“Look well at that man,” he whispered. “It’s time to warn you. Mr. Felix
Sweetsir is the worst enemy you have!”

Isabel heard him in speechless astonishment. He went on in tones that
trembled with suppressed emotion.

“You doubt if Sharon knows the thief. You doubt if I know the thief.
Isabel! as certainly as the heaven is above us, there stands the wretch
who stole the bank-note!”

She drew her hand out of his arm with a cry of terror. She looked at him
as if she doubted whether he was in his right mind.

He took her hand, and waited a moment trying to compose himself.

“Listen to me,” he said. “At the first consultation I had with Sharon he
gave this advice to Mr. Troy and to me. He said, ‘Suspect the very last
person on whom suspicion could possibly fall.’ Those words, taken with
the questions he had asked before he pronounced his opinion, struck
through me as if he had struck me with a knife. I instantly suspected
Lady Lydiard’s nephew. Wait! From that time to this I have said nothing
of my suspicion to any living soul. I knew in my own heart that it
took its rise in the inveterate dislike that I have always felt for Mr.
Sweetsir, and I distrusted it accordingly. But I went back to Sharon,
for all that, and put the case into his hands. His investigations
informed me that Mr. Sweetsir owed ‘debts of honor’ (as gentlemen call
them), incurred through lost bets, to a large number of persons, and
among them a bet of five hundred pounds lost to Mr. Hardyman. Further
inquiries showed that Mr. Hardyman had taken the lead in declaring that
he would post Mr. Sweetsir as a defaulter, and have him turned out of
his clubs, and turned out of the betting-ring. Ruin stared him in the
face if he failed to pay his debt to Mr. Hardyman on the last day left
to him--the day after the note was lost. On that very morning, Lady
Lydiard, speaking to me of her nephew’s visit to her, said, ‘If I had
given him an opportunity of speaking, Felix would have borrowed money
of me; I saw it in his face.’ One moment more, Isabel. I am not only
certain that Mr. Sweetsir took the five-hundred pound note out of the
open letter, I am firmly persuaded that he is the man who told Lord
Rotherfield of the circumstances under which you left Lady Lydiard’s
house. Your marriage to Mr. Hardyman might have put you in a position to
detect the theft. You, not I, might, in that case, have discovered from
your husband that the stolen note was the note with which Mr. Sweetsir
paid his debt. He came here, you may depend on it, to make sure that he
had succeeded in destroying your prospects. A more depraved villain at
heart than that man never swung from a gallows!”

He checked himself at those words. The shock of the disclosure, the
passion and vehemence with which he spoke, overwhelmed Isabel. She
trembled like a frightened child.

While he was still trying to soothe and reassure her, a low whining
made itself heard at her feet. They looked down, and saw Tommie. Finding
himself noticed at last, he expressed his sense of relief by a bark.
Something dropped out of his mouth. As Moody stooped to pick it up, the
dog ran to Isabel and pushed his head against her feet, as his way was
when he expected to have the handkerchief thrown over him, preparatory
to one of those games at hide-and-seek which have been already
mentioned. Isabel put out her hand to caress him, when she was stopped
by a cry from Moody. It was _his_ turn to tremble now. His voice
faltered as he said the words, “The dog has found the pocketbook!”

He opened the book with shaking hands. A betting-book was bound up in
it, with the customary calendar. He turned to the date of the day after
the robbery.

There was the entry: “Felix Sweetsir. Paid 500 pounds. Note numbered, N
8, 70564; dated 15th May, 1875.”

Moody took from his waistcoat pocket his own memorandum of the number
of the lost bank-note. “Read it Isabel,” he said. “I won’t trust my
memory.”

She read it. The number and date of the note entered in the pocketbook
exactly corresponded with the number and date of the note that Lady
Lydiard had placed in her letter.

Moody handed the pocketbook to Isabel. “There is the proof of your
innocence,” he said, “thanks to the dog! Will you write and tell Mr.
Hardyman what has happened?” he asked, with his head down and his eyes
on the ground.

She answered him, with the bright color suddenly flowing over her face.

“_You_ shall write to him,” she said, “when the time comes.”

“What time?” he asked.

She threw her arms round his neck, and hid her face on his bosom.

“The time,” she whispered, “when I am your wife.”

A low growl from Tommie reminded them that he too had some claim to be
noticed.

Isabel dropped on her knees, and saluted her old playfellow with
the heartiest kisses she had ever given him since the day when their
acquaintance began. “You darling!” she said, as she put him down again,
“what can I do to reward you?”

Tommie rolled over on his back--more slowly than usual, in consequence
of his luncheon in the tent. He elevated his four paws in the air and
looked lazily at Isabel out of his bright brown eyes. If ever a dog’s
look spoke yet, Tommie’s look said, “I have eaten too much; rub my
stomach.”




POSTSCRIPT.

Persons of a speculative turn of mind are informed that the following
document is for sale, and are requested to mention what sum they will
give for it.

“IOU, Lady Lydiard, five hundred pounds (L500), Felix Sweetsir.”

Her Ladyship became possessed of this pecuniary remittance under
circumstances which surround it with a halo of romantic interest. It was
the last communication she was destined to receive from her accomplished
nephew. There was a Note attached to it, which cannot fail to enhance
its value in the estimation of all right-minded persons who assist the
circulation of paper money.

The lines that follow are strictly confidential:

“Note.--Our excellent Moody informs me, my dear aunt, that you have
decided (against his advice) on ‘refusing to prosecute.’ I have not
the slightest idea of what he means; but I am very much obliged to
him, nevertheless, for reminding me of a circumstance which is of some
interest to yourself personally.

“I am on the point of retiring to the Continent in search of health.
One generally forgets something important when one starts on a journey.
Before Moody called, I had entirely forgotten to mention that I had the
pleasure of borrowing five hundred pounds of you some little time since.

“On the occasion to which I refer, your language and manner suggested
that you would not lend me the money if I asked for it. Obviously, the
only course left was to take it without asking. I took it while Moody
was gone to get some curacoa; and I returned to the picture-gallery in
time to receive that delicious liqueur from the footman’s hands.

“You will naturally ask why I found it necessary to supply myself (if I
may borrow an expression from the language of State finance) with this
‘forced loan.’ I was actuated by motives which I think do me honor. My
position at the time was critical in the extreme. My credit with the
money-lenders was at an end; my friends had all turned their backs on
me. I must either take the money or disgrace my family. If there is a
man living who is sincerely attached to his family, I am that man. I
took the money.

“Conceive your position as my aunt (I say nothing of myself), if I had
adopted the other alternative. Turned out of the Jockey Club, turned
out of Tattersalls’, turned out of the betting-ring; in short, posted
publicly as a defaulter before the noblest institution in England, the
Turf--and all for want of five hundred pounds to stop the mouth of
the greatest brute I know of, Alfred Hardyman! Let me not harrow your
feelings (and mine) by dwelling on it. Dear and admirable woman! To
you belongs the honor of saving the credit of the family; I can claim
nothing but the inferior merit of having offered you the opportunity.

“My IOU, it is needless to say, accompanies these lines. Can I do
anything for you abroad?--F. S.”


To this it is only necessary to add (first) that Moody was perfectly
right in believing F. S. to be the person who informed Hardyman’s father
of Isabel’s position when she left Lady Lydiard’s house; and (secondly)
that Felix did really forward Mr. Troy’s narrative of the theft to
the French police, altering nothing in it but the number of the lost
bank-note.


What is there left to write about? Nothing is left--but to say good-by
(very sorrowfully on the writer’s part) to the Persons of the Story.

Good-by to Miss Pink--who will regret to her dying day that Isabel’s
answer to Hardyman was No.

Good-by to Lady Lydiard--who differs with Miss Pink, and would have
regretted it, to _her_ dying day, if the answer had been Yes.

Good-by to Moody and Isabel--whose history has closed with the closing
of the clergyman’s book on their wedding-day.

Good-by to Hardyman--who has sold his farm and his horses, and has begun
a new life among the famous fast trotters of America.

Good-by to Old Sharon--who, a martyr to his promise, brushed his hair
and washed his face in honor of Moody’s marriage; and catching a
severe cold as the necessary consequence, declared, in the intervals of
sneezing, that he would “never do it again.”

And last, not least, good-by to Tommie? No. The writer gave Tommie his
dinner not half an hour since, and is too fond of him to say good-by.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Lady’s Money, by Wilkie Collins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY LADY’S MONEY ***

***** This file should be named 1628-0.txt or 1628-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/2/1628/

Produced by James Rusk and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
