The Evil Genius: A Domestic Story~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Evil Genius, by Wilkie Collins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Evil Genius

Author: Wilkie Collins

Posting Date: November 23, 2008 [EBook #1627]
Release Date: February, 1999
Last Updated: December 21, 2017

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EVIL GENIUS ***




Produced by James Rusk





THE EVIL GENIUS

A DOMESTIC STORY

By Wilkie Collins


               Affectionately Dedicated
               to Holman Hunt




BEFORE THE STORY.

Miss Westerfield’s Education

1.--The Trial.

THE gentlemen of the jury retired to consider their verdict.

Their foreman was a person doubly distinguished among his colleagues. He
had the clearest head, and the readiest tongue. For once the right man
was in the right place.

Of the eleven jurymen, four showed their characters on the surface. They
were:

The hungry juryman, who wanted his dinner.

The inattentive juryman, who drew pictures on his blotting paper.

The nervous juryman, who suffered from fidgets.

The silent juryman, who decided the verdict.

Of the seven remaining members, one was a little drowsy man who gave no
trouble; one was an irritable invalid who served under protest; and
five represented that vast majority of the population--easily governed,
tranquilly happy--which has no opinion of its own.



The foreman took his place at the head of the table. His colleagues
seated themselves on either side of him. Then there fell upon that
assembly of men a silence, never known among an assembly of women--the
silence which proceeds from a general reluctance to be the person who
speaks first.

It was the foreman’s duty, under these circumstances, to treat his
deliberative brethren as we treat our watches when they stop: he wound
the jury up and set them going.

“Gentlemen,” he began, “have you formed any decided opinion on the
case--thus far?”

Some of them said “Yes,” and some of them said “No.” The little drowsy
man said nothing. The fretful invalid cried, “Go on!” The nervous
juryman suddenly rose. His brethren all looked at him, inspired by the
same fear of having got an orator among them. He was an essentially
polite man; and he hastened to relieve their minds. “Pray don’t be
alarmed, gentlemen: I am not going to make a speech. I suffer from
fidgets. Excuse me if I occasionally change my position.” The hungry
juryman (who dined early) looked at his watch. “Half-past four,” he
said. “For Heaven’s sake cut it short.” He was the fattest person
present; and he suggested a subject to the inattentive juryman who drew
pictures on his blotting-paper. Deeply interested in the progress of the
likeness, his neighbors on either side looked over his shoulders. The
little drowsy man woke with a start, and begged pardon of everybody.
The fretful invalid said to himself, “Damned fools, all of them!” The
patient foreman, biding his time, stated the case.

“The prisoner waiting our verdict, gentlemen, is the Honorable Roderick
Westerfield, younger brother of the present Lord Le Basque. He is
charged with willfully casting away the British bark _John Jerniman_,
under his command, for the purpose of fraudulently obtaining a share
of the insurance money; and further of possessing himself of certain
Brazilian diamonds, which formed part of the cargo. In plain words,
here is a gentleman born in the higher ranks of life accused of being a
thief. Before we attempt to arrive at a decision, we shall only be doing
him justice if we try to form some general estimate of his character,
based on the evidence--and we may fairly begin by inquiring into his
relations with the noble family to which he belongs. The evidence, so
far, is not altogether creditable to him. Being at the time an officer
of the Royal Navy, he appears to have outraged the feelings of his
family by marrying a barmaid at a public-house.”

The drowsy juryman, happening to be awake at that moment, surprised the
foreman by interposing a statement. “Talking of barmaids,” he said, “I
know a curate’s daughter. She’s in distressed circumstances, poor thing;
and she’s a barmaid somewhere in the north of England. Curiously
enough, the name of the town has escaped my memory. If we had a map of
England--” There he was interrupted, cruelly interrupted, by one of his
brethren.

“And by what right,” cried the greedy juryman, speaking under the
exasperating influence of hunger--“by what right does Mr. Westerfield’s
family dare to suppose that a barmaid may not be a perfectly virtuous
woman?”

Hearing this, the restless gentleman (in the act of changing his
position) was suddenly inspired with interest in the proceedings.
“Pardon me for putting myself forward,” he said, with his customary
politeness. “Speaking as an abstainer from fermented liquors, I must
really protest against these allusions to barmaids.”

“Speaking as a consumer of fermented liquors,” the invalid remarked, “I
wish I had a barmaid and a bottle of champagne before me now.”

Superior to interruption, the admirable foreman went on:

“Whatever you may think, gentlemen, of the prisoner’s marriage, we have
it in evidence that his relatives turned their backs on him from that
moment--with the one merciful exception of the head of the family. Lord
Le Basque exerted his influence with the Admiralty, and obtained for
his brother (then out of employment) an appointment to a ship. All
the witnesses agree that Mr. Westerfield thoroughly understood his
profession. If he could have controlled himself, he might have risen to
high rank in the Navy. His temper was his ruin. He quarreled with one of
his superior officers--”

“Under strong provocation,” said a member of the jury.

“Under strong provocation,” the foreman admitted. “But provocation
is not an excuse, judged by the rules of discipline. The prisoner
challenged the officer on duty to fight a duel, at the first
opportunity, on shore; and, receiving a contemptuous refusal, struck him
on the quarter-deck. As a matter of course, Mr. Westerfield was tried by
court-martial, and was dismissed the service. Lord Le Basque’s patience
was not exhausted yet. The Merchant Service offered a last chance to the
prisoner of retrieving his position, to some extent at least. He was fit
for the sea, and fit for nothing else. At my lord’s earnest request the
owners of the _John Jerniman_, trading between Liverpool and Rio, took
Mr. Westerfield on trial as first mate, and, to his credit be it said,
he justified his brother’s faith in him. In a tempest off the coast of
Africa the captain was washed overboard and the first mate succeeded
to the command. His seamanship and courage saved the vessel, under
circumstances of danger which paralyzed the efforts of the other
officers. He was confirmed, rightly confirmed, in the command of
the ship. And, so far, we shall certainly not be wrong if we view his
character on the favorable side.”

There the foreman paused, to collect his ideas.

Certain members of the assembly--led by the juryman who wanted his
dinner, and supported by his inattentive colleague, then engaged in
drawing a ship in a storm, and a captain falling overboard--proposed the
acquittal of the prisoner without further consideration. But the fretful
invalid cried “Stuff!” and the five jurymen who had no opinions of
their own, struck by the admirable brevity with which he expressed his
sentiments, sang out in chorus, “Hear! hear! hear!” The silent juryman,
hitherto overlooked, now attracted attention. He was a bald-headed
person of uncertain age, buttoned up tight in a long frockcoat, and
wearing his gloves all through the proceedings. When the chorus of five
cheered, he smiled mysteriously. Everybody wondered what that smile
meant. The silent juryman kept his opinion to himself. From that moment
he began to exercise a furtive influence over the jury. Even the foreman
looked at him, on resuming the narrative.

“After a certain term of service, gentlemen, during which we learn
nothing to his disadvantage, the prisoner’s merits appear to have
received their reward. He was presented with a share in the ship which
he commanded, in addition to his regular salary as master. With these
improved prospects he sailed from Liverpool on his last voyage to
Brazil; and no one, his wife included, had the faintest suspicion that
he left England under circumstances of serious pecuniary embarrassment.
The testimony of his creditors, and of other persons with whom he
associated distinctly proves that his leisure hours on shore had
been employed in card-playing and in betting on horse races. After an
unusually long run of luck, his good fortune seems to have deserted him.
He suffered considerable losses, and was at last driven to borrowing at
a high rate of interest, without any reasonable prospect of being able
to repay the money-lenders into whose hands he had fallen. When he
left Rio on the homeward voyage, there is no sort of doubt that he was
returning to England to face creditors whom he was unable to pay. There,
gentlemen, is a noticeable side to his character which we may call the
gambling side, and which (as I think) was too leniently viewed by the
judge.”

He evidently intended to add a word or two more. But the disagreeable
invalid insisted on being heard.

“In plain English,” he said, “you are for finding the prisoner guilty.”

“In plain English,” the foreman rejoined, “I refuse to answer that
question.”

“Why?”

“Because it is no part of my duty to attempt to influence the verdict.”

“You have been trying to influence the verdict, sir, ever since you
entered this room. I appeal to all the gentlemen present.”

The patience of the long-suffering foreman failed him at last. “Not
another word shall pass my lips,” he said, “until you find the prisoner
guilty or not guilty among yourselves--and then I’ll tell you if I agree
to your verdict.”

He folded his arms, and looked like the image of a man who intended to
keep his word.

The hungry juryman laid himself back in his chair, and groaned. The
amateur artist, who had thus far found a fund of amusement in his
blotting-paper, yawned discontentedly and dropped his pen. The courteous
gentleman who suffered from fidgets requested leave to walk up and down
the room; and at the first turn he took woke the drowsy little man, and
maddened the irritable invalid by the creaking of his boots. The chorus
of five, further than ever from arriving at an opinion of their own,
looked at the silent juryman. Once more he smiled mysteriously; and once
more he offered no explanation of what was passing in his mind--except
that he turned his bald head slowly in the direction of the foreman. Was
he in sympathy with a man who had promised to be as silent as himself?

In the meantime, nothing was said or done. Helpless silence prevailed in
every part of the room.

“Why the devil doesn’t somebody begin?” cried the invalid. “Have you all
forgotten the evidence?”

This startling question roused the jury to a sense of what was due to
their oaths, if not to themselves. Some of them recollected the evidence
in one way, and some of them recollected it in another; and each man
insisted on doing justice to his own excellent memory, and on stating
his own unanswerable view of the case.

The first man who spoke began at the middle of the story told by the
witnesses in court. “I am for acquitting the captain, gentlemen; he
ordered out the boats, and saved the lives of the crew.”--“And I am for
finding him guilty, because the ship struck on a rock in broad daylight,
and in moderate weather.”--“I agree with you, sir. The evidence shows
that the vessel was steered dangerously near to the land, by direction
of the captain, who gave the course.”--“Come, come, gentlemen! let us
do the captain justice. The defense declares that he gave the customary
course, and that it was not followed when he left the deck. As for
his leaving the ship in moderate weather, the evidence proves that he
believed he saw signs of a storm brewing.”--“Yes, yes, all very well,
but what were the facts? When the loss of the ship was reported, the
Brazilian authorities sent men to the wreck, on the chance of saving
the cargo; and, days afterward, there the ship was found, just as
the captain and the crew had left her.”--“Don’t forget, sir, that the
diamonds were missing when the salvors examined the wreck.”--“All right,
but that’s no proof that the captain stole the diamonds; and, before
they had saved half the cargo, a storm did come on and break the
vessel up; so the poor man was only wrong in the matter of time, after
all.”--“Allow me to remind you, gentlemen that the prisoner was deeply
in debt, and therefore had an interest in stealing the diamonds.”--“Wait
a little, sir. Fair play’s a jewel. Who was in charge of the deck when
the ship struck? The second mate. And what did the second mate do, when
he heard that his owners had decided to prosecute? He committed suicide!
Is there no proof of guilt in that act?”--“You are going a little too
fast, sir. The coroner’s jury declared that the second mate killed
himself in a state of temporary insanity.”--“Gently! gently! we have
nothing to do with what the coroner’s jury said. What did the judge say
when he summed up?”--“Bother the judge! He said what they all say: ‘Find
the prisoner guilty, if you think he did it; and find him not guilty,
if you think he didn’t.’ And then he went away to his comfortable cup
of tea in his private room. And here are we perishing of hunger, and our
families dining without us.”--“Speak for yourself, sir, _I_ haven’t got
a family.”--“Consider yourself lucky, sir; _I_ have got twelve, and
my life is a burden to me, owing to the difficulty of making both ends
meet.”--“Gentlemen! gentlemen! we are wandering again. Is the captain
guilty or not? Mr. Foreman, we none of us intended to offend you. Will
you tell us what _you_ think?”

No; the foreman kept his word. “Decide for yourselves first,” was his
only reply.

In this emergency, the member afflicted with fidgets suddenly assumed a
position of importance. He started a new idea.

“Suppose we try a show of hands,” he suggested. “Gentlemen who find the
prisoner guilty will please hold up their hands.”

Three votes were at once registered in this way, including the vote
of the foreman. After a moment of doubt, the chorus of five decided on
following the opinion which happened to be the first opinion expressed
in point of time. Thereupon, the show of hands for the condemnation
of the prisoner rose to eight. Would this result have an effect on the
undecided minority of four? In any case, they were invited to declare
themselves next. Only three hands were held up. One incomprehensible man
abstained from expressing his sentiments even by a sign. Is it necessary
to say who that man was? A mysterious change had now presented itself in
his appearance, which made him an object of greater interest than ever.
His inexplicable smile had vanished. He sat immovable, with closed eyes.
Was he meditating profoundly? or was he only asleep? The quick-witted
foreman had long since suspected him of being simply the stupidest
person present--with just cunning enough to conceal his own dullness
by holding his tongue. The jury arrived at no such sensible conclusion.
Impressed by the intense solemnity of his countenance, they believed him
to be absorbed in reflections of the utmost importance to the verdict.
After a heated conference among themselves, they decided on inviting
the one independent member present--the member who had taken no part in
their proceedings--to declare his opinion in the plainest possible form.
“Which way does your view of the verdict incline, sir? Guilty or not
guilty?”

The eyes of the silent juryman opened with the slow and solemn dilation
of the eyes of an owl. Placed between the alternatives of declaring
himself in one word or in two, his taciturn wisdom chose the shortest
form of speech. “Guilty,” he answered--and shut his eyes again, as if he
had had enough of it already.

An unutterable sense of relief pervaded the meeting. Enmities were
forgotten and friendly looks were exchanged. With one accord, the jury
rose to return to court. The prisoner’s fate was sealed. The verdict was
Guilty.


2.--The Sentence.


The low hum of talk among the persons in court ceased when the jury
returned to their places. Curiosity now found its center of attraction
in the prisoner’s wife--who had been present throughout the trial. The
question of the moment was: How will she bear the interval of delay
which precedes the giving of the verdict?

In the popular phrase, Mrs. Westerfield was a showy woman. Her
commanding figure was finely robed in dark colors; her profuse light
hair hung over her forehead in little clusters of ringlets; her
features, firmly but not delicately shaped, were on a large scale. No
outward betrayal of the wife’s emotion rewarded the public curiosity:
her bold light-gray eyes sustained the general gaze without flinching.
To the surprise of the women present, she had brought her two young
children with her to the trial. The eldest was a pretty little girl of
ten years old; the second child (a boy) sat on his mother’s knee. It was
generally observed that Mrs. Westerfield took no notice of her eldest
child. When she whispered a word from time to time, it was always
addressed to her son. She fondled him when he grew restless; but she
never looked round to see if the girl at her side was as weary of the
proceedings as the boy.

The judge took his seat, and the order was given to bring the prisoner
up for judgment.

There was a long pause. The audience--remembering his ghastly face when
he first appeared before them--whispered to each other, “He’s taken
ill”; and the audience proved to be right.

The surgeon of the prison entered the witness-box, and, being duly
sworn, made his medical statement.

The prisoner’s heart had been diseased for some time past, and the
malady had been neglected. He had fainted under the prolonged suspense
of waiting for the verdict. The swoon had proved to be of such a serious
nature that the witness refused to answer for consequences if a second
fainting-fit was produced by the excitement of facing the court and the
jury.

Under these circumstances, the verdict was formally recorded, and
sentence was deferred. Once more, the spectators looked at the
prisoner’s wife.

She had risen to leave the court. In the event of an adverse verdict,
her husband had asked for a farewell interview; and the governor of the
prison, after consultation with the surgeon, had granted the request. It
was observed, when she retired, that she held her boy by the hand, and
left the girl to follow. A compassionate lady near her offered to take
care of the children while she was absent. Mrs. Westerfield answered
quietly and coldly: “Thank you--their father wishes to see them.”

The prisoner was dying; nobody could look at him and doubt it.

His eyes opened wearily, when his wife and children approached the bed
on which he lay helpless--the wreck of a grandly-made man. He struggled
for breath, but he could still speak a word or two at a time. “I don’t
ask you what the verdict is,” he said to his wife; “I see it in your
face.”

Tearless and silent, she waited by her husband’s side. He had only
noticed her for a moment. All his interest seemed to be centered in his
children. The girl stood nearest to him, he looked at her with a faint
smile.

The poor child understood him. Crying piteously, she put her arms around
his neck and kissed him. “Dear papa,” she said; “come home and let me
nurse you.”

The surgeon, watching the father’s face, saw a change in him which the
other persons present had not observed. The failing heart felt that
parting moment, and sank under it. “Take the child away,” the surgeon
whispered to the mother. Brandy was near him; he administered it while
he spoke, and touched the fluttering pulse. It felt, just felt, the
stimulant. He revived for a moment, and looked wistfully for his son.
“The boy,” he murmured; “I want my boy.” As his wife brought the child
to him, the surgeon whispered to her again. “If you have anything to say
to him be quick about it!” She shuddered; she took his cold hand. Her
touch seemed to nerve him with new strength; he asked her to stoop over
him. “They won’t let me write here,” he whispered, “unless they see my
letter.” He paused to get his breath again. “Lift up my left arm,” he
gasped. “Open the wrist-band.”

She detached the stud which closed the wrist-band of the shirt. On the
inner side of the linen there was a line written in red letters--red
of the color of blood. She saw these words: _Look in the lining of my
trunk._

“What for?” she asked.

The fading light in his eyes flashed on her a dreadful look of doubt.
His lips fell apart in the vain effort to answer. His last sigh
fluttered the light ringlets of her hair as she bent over him.

The surgeon pointed to her children. “Take the poor things home,” he
said; “they have seen the last of their father.”

Mrs. Westerfield obeyed in silence. She had her own reasons for being in
a hurry to get home. Leaving the children under the servant’s care, she
locked herself up in the dead man’s room, and emptied his trunk of the
few clothes that had been left in it.

The lining which she was now to examine was of the customary material,
and of the usual striped pattern in blue and white. Her fingers were
not sufficiently sensitive to feel anything under the surface, when she
tried it with her hand. Turning the empty trunk with the inner side of
the lid toward the light, she discovered, on one of the blue stripes
of the lining, a thin little shining stain which looked like a stain of
dried gum. After a moment’s consideration, she cut the gummed line with
a penknife. Something of a white color appeared through the aperture.
She drew out a folded sheet of paper.

It proved to be a letter in her husband’s hand-writing. An inclosure
dropped to the floor when she opened it, in the shape of a small slip of
paper. She picked it up. The morsel of paper presented letters, figures,
and crosses arranged in lines, and mingled together in what looked like
hopeless confusion.


3.--The Letter.


Mrs. Westerfield laid the incomprehensible slip of paper aside, and, in
search of an explanation, returned to the letter. Here again she
found herself in a state of perplexity. Directed to “Mrs. Roderick
Westerfield,” the letter began abruptly, without the customary form of
address. Did it mean that her husband was angry with her when he wrote?
It meant that he doubted her.

In these terms he expressed himself:



“I write to you before my trial takes place. If the verdict goes in my
favor, I shall destroy what I have written. If I am found guilty, I must
leave it to you to do what I should otherwise have done for myself.

“The undeserved misfortune that has overtaken me began with the arrival
of my ship in the port of Rio. Our second mate (his duty for the day
being done) asked leave to go on shore--and never returned. What motive
determined him on deserting, I am not able to say. It was my own wish
to supply his place by promoting the best seaman on board. My owners’
agents overruled me, and appointed a man of their own choosing.

“What nation he belonged to I don’t know. The name he gave me was
Beljames, and he was reported to be a broken-down gentleman. Whoever he
might be, his manner and his talk were captivating. Everybody liked him.

“After the two calamities of the loss of the ship and the disappearance
of the diamonds--these last being valued at five thousand pounds--I
returned to England by the first opportunity that offered, having
Beljames for a companion.

“Shortly after getting back to my house in London, I was privately
warned by a good friend that my owners had decided to prosecute me for
willfully casting away the ship, and (crueler still) for having stolen
the missing diamonds. The second mate, who had been in command of the
vessel when she struck on the rock, was similarly charged along with
me. Knowing myself to be innocent, I determined, of course, to stand
my trial. My wonder was, what Beljames would do. Would he follow my
example? or, if he got the chance, would he try to make his escape?

“I might have thought it only friendly to give this person a word of
warning, if I had known where to find him. We had separated when the
ship reached the port of Falmouth, in Cornwall, and had not met since. I
gave him my address in London; but he gave me no address in return.

“On the voyage home, Beljames told me that a legacy had been left to
him; being a small freehold house and garden in St. John’s Wood, London.
His agent, writing to him on the subject, had reported the place to be
sadly out of repair, and had advised him to find somebody who would
take it off his hands on reasonable terms. This seemed to point to a
likelihood of his being still in London, trying to sell his house.

“While my mind was running on these recollections, I was told that a
decent elderly woman wanted to see me. She proved to be the landlady of
the house in which Beljames lodged; and she brought an alarming message.
The man was dying, and desired to see me. I went to him immediately.

“Few words are best, when one has to write about one’s own troubles.

“Beljames had heard of the intended prosecution. How he had been made
aware of it, death left him no time to tell me. The miserable wretch had
poisoned himself--whether in terror of standing his trial, or in remorse
of conscience, it is not any business of mine to decide. Most unluckily
for me, he first ordered the doctor and the landlady out of the room;
and then, when we two were alone, owned that he had purposely altered
the course of the ship, and had stolen the diamonds.

“To do him justice, he was eager to save me from suffering for his
fault.

“Having eased his mind by confession, he gave me the slip of paper
(written in cipher) which you will find inclosed in this. ‘There is my
note of the place where the diamonds are hidden,’ he said. Among the
many ignorant people who know nothing of ciphers, I am one--and I
told him so. ‘That’s how I keep my secret,’ he said; ‘write from my
dictation, and you shall know what it means. Lift me up first.’ As I did
it, he rolled his head to and fro, evidently in pain. But he managed to
point to pen, ink, and paper, on a table hard by, on which his doctor
had been writing. I left him for a moment, to pull the table nearer to
the bed--and in that moment he groaned, and cried out for help. I ran
to the room downstairs where the doctor was waiting. When we got back to
him he was in convulsions. It was all over with Beljames.

“The lawyers who are to defend me have tried to get Experts, as they
call them, to interpret the cipher. The Experts have all failed. They
will declare, if they are called as witnesses, that the signs on the
paper are not according to any known rules, and are marks made at
random, meaning nothing.

“As for any statement, on my part, of the confession made to me, the law
refuses to hear it, except from the mouth of a witness. I might prove
that the ship’s course was changed, contrary to my directions, after I
had gone below to rest, if I could find the man who was steering at the
time. God only knows where that man is.

“On the other hand, the errors of my past life, and my being in debt,
are circumstances dead against me. The lawyers seem to trust almost
entirely in a famous counsel, whom they have engaged to defend me. For
my own part, I go to my trial with little or no hope.

“If the verdict is guilty, and if you have any regard left for my
character, never rest until you have found somebody who can interpret
these cursed signs. Do for me, I say, what I cannot do for myself.
Recover the diamonds; and, when you restore them, show my owners this
letter.

“Kiss the children for me. I wish them, when they are old enough, to
read this defense of myself and to know that their father, who loved
them dearly, was an innocent man. My good brother will take care of you,
for my sake. I have done.

“RODERICK WESTERFIELD.”


Mrs. Westerfield took up the cipher once more. She looked at it as if it
were a living thing that defied her.

“If I am able to read this gibberish,” she decided, “I know what I’ll do
with the diamonds!”

4.--The Garret.

One year exactly after the fatal day of the trial, Mrs. Westerfield
(secluded in the sanctuary of her bedroom) celebrated her release from
the obligation of wearing widow’s weeds.

The conventional graduations in the outward expression of grief, which
lead from black clothing to gray, formed no part of this afflicted
lady’s system of mourning. She laid her best blue walking dress and her
new bonnet to match on the bed, and admired them to her heart’s content.
Her discarded garments were left on the floor. “Thank Heaven, I’ve done
with you!” she said--and kicked her rusty mourning out of the way as she
advanced to the fireplace to ring the bell.

“Where is my little boy?” she asked, when the landlady entered the room.

“He’s down with me in the kitchen, ma’am; I’m teaching him to make a
plum cake for himself. He’s so happy! I hope you don’t want him just
now?”

“Not the least in the world. I want you to take care of him while I am
away. By-the-by, where’s Syd?”

The elder child (the girl) had been christened Sydney, in compliment
to one of her father’s female relatives. The name was not liked by her
mother--who had shortened it to Syd, by way of leaving as little of
it as possible. With a look at Mrs. Westerfield which expressed
ill-concealed aversion, the landlady answered: “She’s up in the
lumber-room, poor child. She says you sent her there to be out of the
way.”

“Ah, to be sure, I did.”

“There’s no fireplace in the garret, ma’am. I’m afraid the little girl
must be cold and lonely.”

It was useless to plead for Syd--Mrs. Westerfield was not listening.
Her attention was absorbed by her own plump and pretty hands. She took
a tiny file from the dressing-table, and put a few finishing touches to
her nails. “Send me some hot water,” she said; “I want to dress.”

The servant girl who carried the hot water upstairs was new to the ways
of the house. After having waited on Mrs. Westerfield, she had been
instructed by the kind-hearted landlady to go on to the top floor. “You
will find a pretty little girl in the garret, all by herself. Say you
are to bring her down to my room, as soon as her mamma has gone out.”

Mrs. Westerfield’s habitual neglect of her eldest child was known
to every person in the house. Even the new servant had heard of it.
Interested by what she saw, on opening the garret door, she stopped on
the threshold and looked in.

The lumber in the room consisted of two rotten old trunks, a broken
chair, and a dirty volume of sermons of the old-fashioned quarto size.
The grimy ceiling, slanting downward to a cracked window, was stained
with rain that had found its way through the roof. The faded wall-paper,
loosened by damp, was torn away in some places, and bulged loose in
others. There were holes in the skirting-board; and from one of them
peeped the brightly timid eyes of the child’s only living companion
in the garret--a mouse, feeding on crumbs which she had saved from her
breakfast.

Syd looked up when the mouse darted back into its hole, on the opening
of the door. “Lizzie! Lizzie!” she said, gravely, “you ought to have
come in without making a noise. You have frightened away my youngest
child.”

The good-natured servant burst out laughing. “Have you got a large
family, miss?” she inquired, humoring the joke.

Syd failed to see the joke. “Only two more,” she answered as gravely as
ever--and lifted up from the floor two miserable dolls, reduced to the
last extremity of dirt and dilapidation. “My two eldest,” this strange
child resumed, setting up the dolls against one of the empty trunks.
“The eldest is a girl, and her name is Syd. The other is a boy, untidy
in his clothes, as you see. Their kind mamma forgives them when they are
naughty, and buys ponies for them to ride on, and always has something
nice for them to eat when they are hungry. Have you got a kind mamma,
Lizzie? And are you very fond of her?”

Those innocent allusions to the neglect which was the one sad experience
of Syd’s young life touched the servant’s heart. A bygone time was
present to her memory, when she too had been left without a playfellow
to keep her company or a fire to warm her, and she had not endured it
patiently.

“Oh, my dear,” she said, “your poor little arms are red with cold. Come
to me and let me rub them.”

But Syd’s bright imagination was a better protection against the cold
than all the rubbing that the hands of a merciful woman could offer.
“You are very kind, Lizzie,” she answered. “I don’t feel the cold when
I am playing with my children. I am very careful to give them plenty of
exercise, we are going to walk in the Park.”

She gave a hand to each of the dolls, and walked slowly round and round
the miserable room, pointing out visionary persons of distinction and
objects of interest. “Here’s the queen, my dears, in her gilt coach,
drawn by six horses. Do you see her scepter poking out of the carriage
window? She governs the nation with that. Bow to the queen. And now look
at the beautiful bright water. There’s the island where the ducks live.
Ducks are happy creatures. They have their own way in everything, and
they’re good to eat when they’re dead. At least they used to be good,
when we had nice dinners in papa’s time. I try to amuse the poor little
things, Lizzie. Their papa is dead. I’m obliged to be papa and mamma to
them, both in one. Do you feel the cold, my dears?” She shivered as she
questioned her imaginary children. “Now we are at home again,” she said,
and led the dolls to the empty fireplace. “Roaring fires always in _my_
house,” cried the resolute little creature, rubbing her hands cheerfully
before the bleak blank grate.

Warm-hearted Lizzie could control herself no longer.

“If the child would only make some complaint,” she burst out, “it
wouldn’t be so dreadful! Oh, what a shame! what a shame!” she cried, to
the astonishment of little Syd. “Come down, my dear, to the nice warm
room where your brother is. Oh, your mother? I don’t care if your mother
sees us; I should like to give your mother a piece of my mind. There! I
don’t mean to frighten you; I’m one of your bad children--I fly into a
passion. You carry the dolls and I’ll carry _you_. Oh, how she shivers!
Give us a kiss.”

Sympathy which expressed itself in this way was new to Syd. Her eyes
opened wide in childish wonder--and suddenly closed again in childish
terror, when her good friend the servant passed Mrs. Westerfield’s door
on the way downstairs. “If mamma bounces out on us,” she whispered,
“pretend we don’t see her.” The nice warm room received them in safety.
Under no stress of circumstances had Mrs. Westerfield ever been known
to dress herself in a hurry. A good half-hour more had passed before the
house door was heard to bang--and the pleasant landlady, peeping through
the window, said: “There she goes. Now, we’ll enjoy ourselves!”

5.--The Landlord.

Mrs. Westerfield’s destination was the public-house in which she had
been once employed as a barmaid. Entering the place without hesitation,
she sent in her card to the landlord. He opened the parlor door himself
and invited her to walk in.

“You wear well,” he said, admiring her. “Have you come back here to be
my barmaid again?”

“Do you think I am reduced to that?” she answered.

“Well, my dear, more unlikely things have happened. They tell me you
depend for your income on Lord Le Basque--and his lordship’s death was
in the newspapers last week.”

“And his lordship’s lawyers continue my allowance.”

Having smartly set the landlord right in those words, she had not
thought it necessary to add that Lady Le Basque, continuing the
allowance at her husband’s request, had also notified that it would
cease if Mrs. Westerfield married again.

“You’re a lucky woman,” the landlord remarked. “Well, I’m glad to see
you. What will you take to drink?”

“Nothing, thank you. I want to know if you have heard anything lately of
James Bellbridge?”

The landlord was a popular person in his own circle--not accustomed to
restrain himself when he saw his way to a joke. “Here’s constancy!” he
said. “She’s sweet on James, after having jilted him twelve years ago!”

Mrs. Westerfield replied with dignity. “I am accustomed to be treated
respectfully,” she replied. “I wish you good-morning.”

The easy landlord pressed her back into her chair. “Don’t be a fool,”
 he said; “James is in London--James is staying in my house. What do you
think of that?”

Mrs. Westerfield’s bold gray eyes expressed eager curiosity and
interest. “You don’t mean that he is going to be barman here again?”

“No such luck, my dear; he is a gentleman at large, who patronizes my
house.”

Mrs. Westerfield went on with her questions.

“Has he left America for good?”

“Not he! James Bellbridge is going back to New York, to open a saloon
(as they call it) in partnership with another man. He’s in England,
he says, on business. It’s my belief that he wants money for this new
venture on bad security. They’re smart people in New York. His only
chance of getting his bills discounted is to humbug his relations, down
in the country.”

“When does he go to the country?”

“He’s there now.”

“When does he come back?”

“You’re determined to see him, it appears. He comes back to-morrow.”

“Is he married?”

“Aha! now we’re coming to the point. Make your mind easy. Plenty of
women have set the trap for him, but he has not walked into it yet.
Shall I give him your love?”

“Yes,” she said, coolly. “As much love as you please.”

“Meaning marriage?” the landlord inquired.

“And money,” Mrs. Westerfield added.

“Lord Le Basque’s money.”

“Lord Le Basque’s money may go to the Devil!”

“Hullo! Your language reminds me of the time when you were a barmaid.
You don’t mean to say you have had a fortune left you?”

“I do! Will you give a message to James?”

“I’ll do anything for a lady with a fortune.”

“Tell him to come and drink tea with his old sweetheart tomorrow, at six
o’clock.”

“He won’t do it.”

“He will.”

With that difference of opinion, they parted.

6.--The Brute.

To-morrow came--and Mrs. Westerfield’s faithful James justified her
confidence in him.

“Oh, Jemmy, how glad I am to see you! You dear, dear fellow. I’m yours
at last.”

“That depends, my lady, on whether I want you. Let go of my neck.”

The man who entered this protest against imprisonment in the arms of a
fine woman, was one of the human beings who are grown to perfection on
English soil. He had the fat face, the pink complexion, the hard blue
eyes, the scanty yellow hair, the smile with no meaning in it, the
tremendous neck and shoulders, the mighty fists and feet, which are seen
in complete combination in England only. Men of this breed possess a
nervous system without being aware of it; suffer affliction without
feeling it; exercise courage without a sense of danger; marry without
love; eat and drink without limit; and sink (big as they are), when
disease attacks them, without an effort to live.

Mrs. Westerfield released her guest’s bull-neck at the word of command.
It was impossible not to submit to him--he was so brutal. Impossible not
to admire him--he was so big.

“Have you no love left for me?” was all she ventured to say.

He took the reproof good-humoredly. “Love?” he repeated. “Come! I like
that--after throwing me over for a man with a handle to his name. Which
am I to call you: ‘Mrs?’ or ‘My Lady’?”

“Call me your own. What is there to laugh at, Jemmy? You used to be fond
of me; you would never have gone to America, when I married Westerfield,
if I hadn’t been dear to you. Oh, if I’m sure of anything, I’m sure of
that! You wouldn’t bear malice, dear, if you only knew how cruelly I
have been disappointed.”

He suddenly showed an interest in what she was saying: the brute became
cheery and confidential. “So he made you a bad husband, did he? Up with
his fist and knocked you down, I daresay, if the truth was known?”

“You’re all in the wrong, dear. He would have been a good husband if
I had cared about him. I never cared about anybody but you. It wasn’t
Westerfield who tempted me to say Yes.”

“That’s a lie.”

“No, indeed it isn’t.”

“Then why did you marry him?”

“When I married him, Jemmy, there was a prospect--oh, how could I resist
it? Think of being one of the Le Basques! Held in honor, to the end of
my life, by that noble family, whether my husband lived or died!”

To the barman’s ears, this sounded like sheer nonsense. His experience
in the public-house suggested an explanation. “I say, my girl, have you
been drinking?”

Mrs. Westerfield’s first impulse led her to rise and point indignantly
to the door. He had only to look at her--and she sat down again a tamed
woman. “You don’t understand how the chance tempted me,” she answered,
gently.

“What chance do you mean?”

“The chance, dear, of being a lord’s mother.”

He was still puzzled, but he lowered his tone. The true-born Briton
bowed by instinct before the woman who had jilted him, when she
presented herself in the character of a lord’s mother. “How do you make
that out, Maria?” he asked politely.

She drew her chair nearer to him, when he called her by her Christian
name for the first time.

“When Westerfield was courting me,” she said, “his brother (my lord) was
a bachelor. A lady--if one can call such a creature a lady!--was living
under his protection. He told Westerfield he was very fond of her, and
he hated the idea of getting married. ‘If your wife’s first child turns
out to be a son,’ he said, ‘there is an heir to the title and estates,
and I may go on as I am now.’ We were married a month afterward--and
when my first child was born it was a girl. I leave you to judge what
the disappointment was! My lord (persuaded, as I suspect, by the woman
I mentioned just now) ran the risk of waiting another year, and a year
afterward, rather than be married. Through all that time, I had no other
child or prospect of a child. His lordship was fairly driven into
taking a wife. Ah, how I hate her! _Their_ first child was a boy--a
big, bouncing, healthy brute of a boy! And six months afterward, my poor
little fellow was born. Only think of it! And tell me, Jemmy, don’t
I deserve to be a happy woman, after suffering such a dreadful
disappointment as that? Is it true that you’re going back to America?”

“Quite true.”

“Take me back with you.”

“With a couple of children?”

“No. Only with one. I can dispose of the other in England. Wait a little
before you say No. Do you want money?”

“You couldn’t help me, if I did.”

“Marry me, and I can help you to a fortune.”

He eyed her attentively and saw that she was in earnest. “What do you
call a fortune?” he asked.

“Five thousand pounds,” she answered.

His eyes opened; his mouth opened; he scratched his head. Even his
impenetrable nature proved to be capable of receiving a shock. Five
thousand pounds! He asked faintly for “a drop of brandy.”

She had a bottle of brandy ready for him.

“You look quite overcome,” she said.

He was too deeply interested in the restorative influence of the brandy
to take any notice of this remark. When he had recovered himself he was
not disposed to believe in the five thousand pounds.

“Where’s the proof of it?” he said, sternly.

She produced her husband’s letter. “Did you read the Trial of
Westerfield for casting away his ship?” she asked.

“I heard of it.”

“Will you look at this letter?”

“Is it long?”

“Yes.”

“Then suppose you read it to me.”

He listened with the closest attention while she read. The question
of stealing the diamonds (if they could only be found) did not trouble
either of them. It was a settled question, by tacit consent on both
sides. But the value in money of the precious stones suggested a doubt
that still weighed on his mind.

“How do you know they’re worth five thousand pounds?” he inquired.

“You dear old stupid! Doesn’t Westerfield himself say so in his letter?”

“Read that bit again.”

She read it again: “After the two calamities of the loss of the ship,
and the disappearance of the diamonds--these last being valued at five
thousand pounds--I returned to England.”

Satisfied so far, he wanted to look at the cipher next. She handed it to
him with a stipulation: “Yours, Jemmy, on the day when you marry me.”

He put the slip of paper into his pocket. “Now I’ve got it,” he said,
“suppose I keep it?”

A woman who has been barmaid at a public-house is a woman not easily
found at the end of her resources.

“In that case,” she curtly remarked, “I should first call in the police,
and then telegraph to my husband’s employers in Liverpool.”

He handed the cipher back. “I was joking,” he said.

“So was I,” she answered.

They looked at each other. They were made for each other--and they both
felt it. At the same time, James kept his own interests steadily in
view. He stated the obvious objection to the cipher. Experts had already
tried to interpret the signs, and had failed.

“Quite true,” she added, “but other people may succeed.”

“How are you to find them?”

“Leave me to try. Will you give me a fortnight from to-day?”

“All right. Anything else?”

“One thing more. Get the marriage license at once.”

“Why?”

“To show that you are in earnest.”

He burst out laughing. “It mightn’t be much amiss,” he said, “if I took
you back with me to America; you’re the sort of woman we want in our new
saloon. I’ll get the license. Good-night.”

As he rose to go, there was a soft knock at the door. A little girl, in
a shabby frock, ventured to show herself in the room.

“What do you want here?” her mother asked sharply.

Syd held out a small thin hand, with a letter in it, which represented
her only excuse. Mrs. Westerfield read the letter, and crumpled it up
in her pocket. “One of your secrets?” James asked. “Anything about the
diamonds, for instance?”

“Wait till you are my husband,” she said, “and then you may be as
inquisitive as you please.” Her amiable sweetheart’s guess had actually
hit the mark. During the year that had passed, she too had tried her
luck among the Experts, and had failed. Having recently heard of a
foreign interpreter of ciphers, she had written to ask his terms.
The reply (just received) not only estimated his services at an
extravagantly high rate, but asked cautious questions which it was not
convenient to answer. Another attempt had been made to discover the
mystery of the cipher, and made in vain.

James Bellbridge had his moments of good-humor, and was on those rare
occasions easily amused. He eyed the child with condescending curiosity.
“Looks half starved,” he said--as if he were considering the case of a
stray cat. “Hollo, there! Buy a bit of bread.” He tossed a penny to Syd
as she left the room; and took the opportunity of binding his bargain
with Syd’s mother. “Mind! if I take you to New York, I’m not going to be
burdened with both your children. Is that girl the one you leave behind
you?”

Mrs. Westerfield smiled sweetly, and answered: “Yes, dear.”

7.--The Cipher.

An advertisement in the newspapers, addressed to persons skilled in
the interpretation of ciphers, now represented Mrs. Westerfield’s only
chance of discovering where the diamonds were hidden. The first answer
that she received made some amends for previous disappointment. It
offered references to gentlemen, whose names were in themselves a
sufficient guarantee. She verified the references nevertheless, and paid
a visit to her correspondent on the same day.

His personal appearance was not in his favor--he was old and dirty,
infirm and poor. His mean room was littered with shabby books. None of
the ordinary courtesies of life seemed to be known to him; he neither
wished Mrs. Westerfield good-morning nor asked her to take a seat. When
she attempted to enter into explanations relating to her errand, he
rudely interrupted her.

“Show me your cipher,” he said; “I don’t promise to study it unless I
find it worth my while.”

Mrs. Westerfield was alarmed.

“Do you mean that you want a large sum of money?” she asked.

“I mean that I don’t waste my time on easy ciphers invented by fools.”

She laid the slip of paper on his desk.

“Waste your time on _that_,” she said satirically, “and see how you like
it!”

He examined it--first with his bleared red-rimmed eyes; then with a
magnifying-glass. The only expression of opinion that escaped him was
indicated by his actions. He shut up his book, and gloated over
the signs and characters before him. On a sudden he looked at Mrs.
Westerfield. “How did you come by this?” he asked.

“That’s no business of yours.”

“In other words, you have reasons of your own for not answering my
question?”

“Yes.”

Drawing his own inferences from that reply, he showed his three
last-left yellow teeth in a horrid grin. “I understand!” he said,
speaking to himself. He looked at the cipher once more, and put another
question: “Have you got a copy of this?”

It had not occurred to her to take a copy. He rose and pointed to his
empty chair. His opinion of the cipher was, to all appearance, forced to
express itself by the discovery that there was no copy.

“Do you know what might happen?” he asked. “The only cipher that has
puzzled me for the last ten years might be lost--or stolen--or burned
if there was a fire in the house. You deserve to be punished for your
carelessness. Make the copy yourself.”

This desirable suggestion (uncivilly as it was expressed) had its effect
upon Mrs. Westerfield. Her marriage depended on that precious slip of
paper. She was confirmed in her opinion that this very disagreeable man
might nevertheless be a man to be trusted.

“Shall you be long in finding out what it means?” she asked when her
task was completed.

He carefully compared the copy with the original--and then he replied:

“Days may pass before I can find the clew; I won’t attempt it unless you
give me a week.”

She pleaded for a shorter interval. He coolly handed back her papers;
the original and the copy.

“Try somebody else,” he suggested--and opened his book again. Mrs.
Westerfield yielded with the worst possible grace. In granting him the
week of delay, she approached the subject of his fee for the second
time. “How much will it cost me?” she inquired.

“I’ll tell you when I’ve done.”

“That won’t do! I must know the amount first.”

He handed her back her papers for the second time. Mrs. Westerfield’s
experience of poverty had never been the experience of such independence
as this. In sheer bewilderment, she yielded again. He took back the
original cipher, and locked it up in his desk. “Call here this day
week,” he said--and returned to his book.

“You are not very polite,” she told him, on leaving the room.

“At any rate,” he answered, “I don’t interrupt people when they are
reading.”

The week passed.

Repeating her visit, Mrs. Westerfield found him still seated at his
desk, still surrounded by his books, still careless of the polite
attentions that he owed to a lady.

“Well?” she asked, “have you earned your money?”

“I have found the clew.”

“What is it?” she burst out. “Tell me the substance. I can’t wait to
read.”

He went on impenetrably with what he had to say. “But there are
some minor combinations, which I have still to discover to my own
satisfaction. I want a few days more.”

She positively refused to comply with this request. “Write down the
substance of it,” she repeated, “and tell me what I owe you.”

He handed her back her cipher for the third time.

The woman who could have kept her temper, under such provocation as
this, may be found when the mathematician is found who can square
the circle, or the inventor who can discover perpetual motion. With a
furious look, Mrs. Westerfield expressed her opinion of the philosopher
in two words: “You brute!” She failed to produce the slightest
impression on him.

“My work,” he proceeded, “must be well done or not done at all. This is
Saturday, eleventh of the month. We will say the evening of Wednesday
next.”

Mrs. Westerfield sufficiently controlled herself to be able to review
her engagements for the coming week. On Thursday, the delay exacted by
the marriage license would expire, and the wedding might take place.
On Friday, the express train conveyed passengers to Liverpool, to be in
time for the departure of the steamer for New York on Saturday morning.
Having made these calculations, she asked, with sulky submission, if she
was expected to call again on the Wednesday evening.

“No. Leave me your name and address. I will send you the cipher,
interpreted, at eight o’clock.”

Mrs. Westerfield laid one of her visiting cards on his desk, and left
him.

8.--The Diamonds.

The new week was essentially a week of events.

On the Monday morning, Mrs. Westerfield and her faithful James had their
first quarrel. She took the liberty of reminding him that it was time to
give notice of the marriage at the church, and to secure berths in
the steamer for herself and her son. Instead of answering one way or
another, James asked how the Expert was getting on.

“Has your old man found out where the diamonds are?”

“Not yet.”

“Then we’ll wait till he does.”

“Do you believe my word?” Mrs. Westerfield asked curtly.

James Bellbridge answered, with Roman brevity, “No.”

This was an insult; Mrs. Westerfield expressed her sense of it. She
rose, and pointed to the door. “Go back to America, as soon as you
please,” she said; “and find the money you want--if you can.”

As a proof that she was in earnest she took her copy of the cipher out
of the bosom of her dress, and threw it into the fire. “The original is
safe in my old man’s keeping,” she added. “Leave the room.”

James rose with suspicious docility, and walked out, having his own
private ends in view.

Half an hour later, Mrs. Westerfield’s old man was interrupted over his
work by a person of bulky and blackguard appearance, whom he had never
seen before.

The stranger introduced himself as a gentleman who was engaged to marry
Mrs. Westerfield: he requested (not at all politely) to be permitted to
look at the cipher. He was asked if he had brought a written order to
that effect, signed by the lady herself. Mr. Bellbridge, resting his
fists on the writing-table, answered that he had come to look at the
cipher on his own sole responsibility, and that he insisted on seeing it
immediately. “Allow me to show you something else first,” was the reply
he received to this assertion of his will and pleasure. “Do you know
a loaded pistol, sir, when you see it?” The barrel of the pistol
approached within three inches of the barman’s big head as he leaned
over the writing-table. For once in his life he was taken by surprise.
It had never occurred to him that a professed interpreter of ciphers
might sometimes be trusted with secrets which placed him in a position
of danger, and might therefore have wisely taken measures to protect
himself. No power of persuasion is comparable to the power possessed by
a loaded pistol. James left the room; and expressed his sentiments in
language which has not yet found its way into any English Dictionary.

But he had two merits, when his temper was in a state of repose. He
knew when he was beaten; and he thoroughly appreciated the value of
the diamonds. When Mrs. Westerfield saw him again, on the next day, he
appeared with undeniable claims on her mercy. Notice of the marriage
had been received at the church; and a cabin had been secured for her on
board the steamer.

Her prospects being thus settled, to her own satisfaction, Mrs.
Westerfield was at liberty to make her arrangements for the desertion of
poor little Syd.

The person on whose assistance she could rely was an unmarried elder
sister, distinguished as proprietor of a cheap girls’ school in one
of the suburbs of London. This lady--known to local fame as Miss
Wigger--had already proposed to take Syd into training as a pupil
teacher. “I’ll force the child on,” Miss Wigger promised, “till she
can earn her board and lodging by taking my lowest class. When she
gets older she will replace my regular governess, and I shall save the
salary.”

With this proposal waiting for a reply, Mrs. Westerfield had only to
inform her sister that it was accepted. “Come here,” she wrote, “on
Friday next, at any time before two o’clock, and Syd shall be ready for
you. P.S.--I am to be married again on Thursday, and start for America
with my husband and my boy by next Saturday’s steamer.”

The letter was posted; and the mother’s anxious mind was, to use her own
phrase, relieved of another worry.

As the hour of eight drew near on Wednesday evening, Mrs. Westerfield’s
anxiety forced her to find relief in action of some kind. She opened the
door of her sitting-room and listened on the stairs. It still wanted for
a few minutes to eight o’clock, when there was a ring at the house-bell.
She ran down to open the door. The servant happened to be in the hall,
and answered the bell. The next moment, the door was suddenly closed
again.

“Anybody there?” Mrs. Westerfield asked.

“No, ma’am.”

This seemed strange. Had the old wretch deceived her, after all? “Look
in the letter-box,” she called out. The servant obeyed, and found
a letter. Mrs. Westerfield tore it open, standing on the stairs. It
contained half a sheet of common note-paper. The interpretation of the
cipher was written on it in these words:

“Remember Number 12, Purbeck Road, St. John’s Wood. Go to the
summer-house in the back garden. Count to the fourth plank in the floor,
reckoning from the side wall on the right as you enter the summer-house.
Prize up the plank. Look under the mould and rubbish. Find the
diamonds.”

Not a word of explanation accompanied these lines. Neither had the
original cipher been returned. The strange old man had earned his money,
and had not attended to receive it--had not even sent word where or
how it might be paid! Had he delivered his letter himself? He (or his
messenger) had gone before the house-door could be opened!

A sudden suspicion of him turned her cold. Had he stolen the diamonds?
She was on the point of sending for a cab, and driving it to his
lodgings, when James came in, eager to know if the interpretation had
arrived.

Keeping her suspicions to herself, she merely informed him that the
interpretation was in her hands. He at once asked to see it. She refused
to show it to him until he had made her his wife. “Put a chisel in your
pocket, when we go to church, to-morrow morning,” was the one hint she
gave him. As thoroughly worthy of each other as ever, the betrothed
lovers distrusted each other to the last.

At eleven o’clock the next morning they were united in the bonds of
wedlock; the landlord and the landlady of the public-house in which they
had both served being the only witnesses present. The children were not
permitted to see the ceremony. On leaving the church door, the married
pair began their honeymoon by driving to St. John’s Wood.

A dirty printed notice, in a broken window, announced that the House was
To Let; and a sour-tempered woman informed them that they were free to
look at the rooms.

The bride was in the best of humors. She set the bridegroom the example
of keeping up appearances by examining the dilapidated house first.
This done, she said sweetly to the person in charge, “May we look at the
garden?”

The woman made a strange answer to this request. “That’s curious,” she
said.

James interfered for the first time. “What’s curious?” he asked roughly.

“Among all the idle people who have come here, at one time or another,
to see this house,” the woman said, “only two have wanted to look at the
garden.”

James turned on his heel, and made for the summer-house, leaving it to
his wife to pursue the subject or not as she pleased. She did pursue the
subject.

“I am one of the persons, of course,” she said. “Who is the other?”

“An old man came on Monday.”

The bride’s pleasant smile vanished.

“What sort of person was he?” she asked.

The sour-tempered woman became sourer than ever.

“Oh, how can I tell! A brute. There!”

“A brute!” The very words which the new Mrs. Bellbridge had herself used
when the Expert had irritated her. With serious misgivings, she, too,
turned her steps in the direction of the garden.

James had already followed her instructions and used his chisel. The
plank lay loose on the floor. With both his big hands he rapidly cleared
away the mould and the rubbish. In a few minutes the hiding-place was
laid bare.

They looked into it. They looked at each other. There was the empty
hole, telling its own story. The diamonds were gone.


9.--The Mother.


Mrs. Bellbridge eyed her husband, prepared for a furious outbreak of
rage. He stood silent, staring stupidly straight before him. The shock
that had fallen on his dull brain had stunned it. For the time, he was a
big idiot--speechless, harmless, helpless.

She put back the rubbish, and replaced the plank, and picked up the
chisel. “Come, James,” she said; “pull yourself together.” It was
useless to speak to him. She took his arm and led him out to the cab
that was waiting at the door.

The driver, helping him to get in, noticed a piece of paper lying on
the front seat. Advertisements, seeking publicity under all possible
circumstances, are occasionally sent flying into the open windows
of vehicles. The driver was about to throw the paper away, when Mrs.
Bellbridge (seeing it on the other side) took it out of his hand. “It
isn’t print,” she said; “it’s writing.” A closer examination showed
that the writing was addressed to herself. Her correspondent must have
followed her to the church, as well as to the house in St. John’s Wood.
He distinguished her by the name which she had changed that morning,
under the sanction of the clergy and the law.

This was what she read: “Don’t trouble yourself, madam, about the
diamonds. You have made a mistake--you have employed the wrong man.”

Those words--and no more. Enough, surely, to justify the conclusion that
he had stolen the diamonds. Was it worth while to drive to his lodgings?
They tried the experiment. The Expert had gone away on business--nobody
knew where.

The newspaper came as usual on Friday morning. To Mrs. Bellbridge’s
amazement it set the question of the theft at rest, on the highest
authority. An article appeared, in a conspicuous position, thus
expressed:

“Another of the many proofs that truth is stranger than fiction has just
occurred at Liverpool. A highly respected firm of shipwreckers in that
city received a strange letter at the beginning of the present week.
Premising that he had some remarkable circumstances to communicate, the
writer of the letter entered abruptly on the narrative which follows:
A friend of his--connected with literature--had, it appeared, noticed a
lady’s visiting card on his desk, and had been reminded by it (in
what way it was not necessary to explain) of a criminal case which had
excited considerable public interest at the time; viz., the trial of
Captain Westerfield for willfully casting away a ship under his command.
Never having heard of the trial, the writer, at his friend’s suggestion,
consulted a file of newspapers--discovered the report--and became aware,
for the first time, that a collection of Brazilian diamonds, consigned
to the Liverpool firm, was missing from the wrecked vessel when she had
been boarded by the salvage party, and had not been found since. Events,
which it was impossible for him to mention (seeing that doing so
would involve a breach of confidence placed in him in his professional
capacity), had revealed to his knowledge a hiding-place in which these
same diamonds, in all probability, were concealed. This circumstance had
left him no alternative, as an honest man, but to be beforehand with the
persons, who (as he believed) contemplated stealing the precious stones.
He had, accordingly, taken them under his protection, until they were
identified and claimed by the rightful owners. In now appealing to these
gentlemen, he stipulated that the claim should be set forth in writing,
addressed to him under initials at a post-office in London. If the
lost property was identified to his satisfaction, he would meet--at a
specified place and on a certain day and hour--a person accredited by
the firm and would personally restore the diamonds, without claiming
(or consenting to receive) a reward. The conditions being complied
with, this remarkable interview took place; the writer of the letter,
described as an infirm old man very poorly dressed, fulfilled his
engagement, took his receipt, and walked away without even waiting to
be thanked. It is only an act of justice to add that the diamonds were
afterward counted, and not one of them was missing.”

Miserable, deservedly-miserable married pair. The stolen fortune, on
which they had counted, had slipped through their fingers. The berths in
the steamer for New York had been taken and paid for. James had married
a woman with nothing besides herself to bestow on him, except an
incumbrance in the shape of a boy.

Late on the fatal wedding-day his first idea, when he was himself
again after the discovery in the summer-house, was to get back his
passage-money, to abandon his wife and his stepson, and to escape
to America in a French steamer. He went to the office of the English
company, and offered the places which he had taken for sale. The season
of the year was against him; the passenger-traffic to America was at its
lowest ebb, and profits depended upon freights alone.

If he still contemplated deserting his wife, he must also submit to
sacrifice his money. The other alternative was (as he expressed it
himself) to “have his pennyworth for his penny, and to turn his family
to good account in New York.” He had not quite decided what to do when
he got home again on the evening of his marriage.

At that critical moment in her life the bride was equal to the demand on
her resources.

If she was foolish enough to allow James to act on his natural impulses,
there were probably two prospects before her. In one state of his
temper, he might knock her down. In another state of his temper, he
might leave her behind him. Her only hope of protecting herself, in
either case, was to tame the bridegroom. In his absence, she wisely
armed herself with the most irresistible fascinations of her sex. Never
yet had he seen her dressed as she was dressed when he came home. Never
yet had her magnificent eyes looked at him as they looked now. Emotions
for which he was not prepared overcame this much injured man; he stared
at the bride in helpless surprise. That inestimable moment of weakness
was all Mrs. Bellbridge asked for. Bewildered by his own transformation,
James found himself reading the newspaper the next morning
sentimentally, with his arm round his wife’s waist.



By a refinement of cruelty, not one word had been said to prepare little
Syd for the dreary change that was now close at hand in her young life.
The poor child had seen the preparations for departure, and had tried to
imitate her mother in packing up. She had collected her few morsels of
darned and ragged clothing, and had gone upstairs to put them into
one of the dilapidated old trunks in the garret play ground, when the
servant was sent to bring her back to the sitting-room. There, enthroned
in an easy-chair, sat a strange lady; and there, hiding behind the chair
in undisguised dislike of the visitor, was her little brother Roderick.
Syd looked timidly at her mother; and her mother said:

“Here is your aunt.”

The personal appearance of Miss Wigger might have suggested a modest
distrust of his own abilities to Lavater, when that self-sufficient man
wrote his famous work on Physiognomy. Whatever betrayal of her inner
self her face might have presented, in the distant time when she was
young, was now completely overlaid by a surface of a flabby fat which,
assisted by green spectacles, kept the virtues (or vices) of this
woman’s nature a profound secret until she opened her lips. When she
used her voice, she let out the truth. Nobody could hear her speak, and
doubt for a moment that she was an inveterately ill-natured woman.

“Make your curtsey, child!” said Miss Wigger. Nature had so toned her
voice as to make it worthy of the terrors of her face. But for her
petticoats, it would have been certainly taken for the voice of a man.

The child obeyed, trembling.

“You are to go away with me,” the school-mistress proceeded, “and to be
taught to make yourself useful under my roof.”

Syd seemed to be incapable of understanding the fate that was in store
for her. She sheltered herself behind her merciless mother. “I’m going
away with you, mamma,” she said--“with you and Rick.”

Her mother took her by the shoulders, and pushed her across the room to
her aunt.

The child looked at the formidable female creature with the man’s voice
and the green spectacles.

“You belong to me,” said Miss Wigger, by way of encouragement, “and
I have come to take you away.” At those dreadful words, terror shook
little Syd from head to foot. She fell on her knees with a cry of misery
that might have melted the heart of a savage. “Oh, mamma, mamma, don’t
leave me behind! What have I done to deserve it? Oh, pray, pray, pray
have some pity on me!”

Her mother was as selfish and as cruel a woman as ever lived. But even
her hard heart felt faintly the influence of the most intimate and most
sacred of all human relationships. Her florid cheeks turned pale. She
hesitated.

Miss Wigger marked (through her own green medium) that moment of
maternal indecision--and saw that it was time to assert her experience
as an instructress of youth.

“Leave it to me,” she said to her sister. “You never did know, and you
never will know, how to manage children.”

She advanced. The child threw herself shrieking on the floor. Miss
Wigger’s long arms caught her up--held her--shook her. “Be quiet, you
imp!” It was needless to tell her to be quiet. Syd’s little curly
head sank on the schoolmistress’s shoulder. She was carried into exile
without a word or a cry--she had fainted.


10.--The School.

Time’s march moves slowly, where weary lives languish in dull places.

Dating from one unkempt and unacknowledged birthday to another, Sydney
Westerfield had attained the sixth year of her martyrdom at School. In
that long interval no news of her mother, her brother, or her stepfather
had reached England; she had received no letter, she had not even heard
a report. Without friends, and without prospects, Roderick Westerfield’s
daughter was, in the saddest sense of the word, alone in the world.



The hands of the ugly old clock in the school-room were approaching
the time when the studies of the morning would come to an end. Wearily
waiting for their release, the scholars saw an event happen which was a
novelty in their domestic experience. The maid-of-all-work audaciously
put her head in at the door, and interrupted Miss Wigger conducting the
education of the first-class.

“If you please, miss, there’s a gentleman--”

Having uttered these introductory words, she was reduced to silence by
the tremendous voice of her mistress.

“Haven’t I forbidden you to come here in school hours? Go away
directly!”

Hardened by a life of drudgery, under conditions of perpetual scolding,
the servant stood her ground, and recovered the use of her tongue.

“There’s a gentleman in the drawing-room,” she persisted. Miss Wigger
tried to interrupt her again. “And here’s his card!” she shouted, in a
voice that was the louder of the two.

Being a mortal creature, the schoolmistress was accessible to the
promptings of curiosity. She snatched the card out of the girl’s hand.

_Mr. Herbert Linley, Mount Morven, Perthshire._ “I don’t know this
person,” Miss Wigger declared. “You wretch, have you let a thief into
the house?”

“A gentleman, if ever I see one yet,” the servant asserted.

“Hold your tongue! Did he ask for me? Do you hear?”

“You told me to hold my tongue. No; he didn’t ask for you.”

“Then who did he want to see?”

“It’s on his card.”

Miss Wigger referred to the card again, and discovered (faintly traced
in pencil) these words: “To see Miss S.W.”

The schoolmistress instantly looked at Miss Westerfield. Miss
Westerfield rose from her place at the head of her class.

The pupils, astonished at this daring act, all looked at the
teacher--their natural enemy, appointed to supply them with undesired
information derived from hated books. They saw one of Mother Nature’s
favorite daughters; designed to be the darling of her family, and
the conqueror of hearts among men of all tastes and ages. But Sydney
Westerfield had lived for six weary years in the place of earthly
torment, kept by Miss Wigger under the name of a school. Every budding
beauty, except the unassailable beauty of her eyes and her hair, had
been nipped under the frosty superintendence of her maternal aunt. Her
cheeks were hollow, her delicate lips were pale; her shabby dress lay
flat over her bosom. Observant people, meeting her when she was out
walking with the girls, were struck by her darkly gentle eyes, and by
the patient sadness of her expression. “What a pity!” they said to each
other. “She would be a pretty girl, if she didn’t look so wretched and
so thin.”

At a loss to understand the audacity of her teacher in rising before the
class was dismissed, Miss Wigger began by asserting her authority. She
did in two words: “Sit down!”

“I wish to explain, ma’am.”

“Sit down.”

“I beg, Miss Wigger, that you will allow me to explain.”

“Sydney Westerfield, you are setting the worst possible example to your
class. I shall see this man myself. _Will_ you sit down?”

Pale already, Sydney turned paler still. She obeyed the word of
command--to the delight of the girls of her class. It was then within
ten minutes of the half hour after twelve--when the pupils were
dismissed to the playground while the cloth was laid for dinner. What
use would the teacher make of that half hour of freedom?

In the meanwhile Miss Wigger had entered her drawing-room. With the
slightest possible inclination of her head, she eyed the stranger
through her green spectacles. Even under that disadvantage his
appearance spoke for itself. The servant’s estimate of him was beyond
dispute. Mr. Herbert Linley’s good breeding was even capable of
suppressing all outward expression of the dismay that he felt, on
finding himself face to face with the formidable person who had received
him.

“What is your business, if you please?” Miss Wigger began.

Men, animals, and buildings wear out with years, and submit to their
hard lot. Time only meets with flat contradiction when he ventures
to tell a woman that she is growing old. Herbert Linley had rashly
anticipated that the “young lady,” whom it was the object of his visit
to see, would prove to be young in the literal sense of the word. When
he and Miss Wigger stood face to face, if the door had been set open for
him, he would have left the house with the greatest pleasure.

“I have taken the liberty of calling,” he said, “in answer to an
advertisement. May I ask”--he paused, and took out a newspaper from the
pocket of his overcoat--“If I have the honor of speaking to the lady who
is mentioned here?”

He opened the newspaper, and pointed to the advertisement.

Miss Wigger’s eyes rested--not on the passage indicated, but on the
visitor’s glove. It fitted him to such perfection that it suggested the
enviable position in life which has gloves made to order. He politely
pointed again. Still inaccessible to the newspaper, Miss Wigger turned
her spectacles next to the front window of the room, and discovered a
handsome carriage waiting at the door. (Money evidently in the pockets
of those beautiful trousers, worthy of the gloves!) As patiently
as ever, Linley pointed for the third time, and drew Miss Wigger’s
attention in the right direction at last. She read the advertisement.


“A Young Lady wishes to be employed in the education of a little girl.
Possessing but few accomplishments, and having been only a junior
teacher at a school, she offers her services on trial, leaving it to her
employer to pay whatever salary she may be considered to deserve, if
she obtains a permanent engagement. Apply by letter, to S.W., 14, Delta
Gardens, N.E.”

“Most impertinent,” said Miss Wigger.

Mr. Linley looked astonished.

“I say, most impertinent!” Miss Wigger repeated.

Mr. Linley attempted to pacify this terrible woman. “It’s very stupid of
me,” he said; “I am afraid I don’t quite understand you.”

“One of my teachers has issued an advertisement, and has referred to
My address, without first consulting Me. Have I made myself understood,
sir?” She looked at the carriage again, when she called him “sir.”

Not even Linley’s capacity for self-restraint could repress the
expression of relief, visible in his brightening face, when he
discovered that the lady of the advertisement and the lady who terrified
him were two different persons.

“Have I made myself understood?” Miss Wigger repeated.

“Perfectly, madam. At the same time, I am afraid I must own that the
advertisement has produced a favorable impression on me.”

“I fail entirely to see why,” Miss Wigger remarked.

“There is surely,” Linley repeated, “something straightforward--I
might almost say, something innocent--in the manner in which the writer
expresses herself. She seems to be singularly modest on the subject
of her own attainments, and unusually considerate of the interests of
others. I hope you will permit me--?”

Before he could add, “to see the young lady,” the door was opened: a
young lady entered the room.

Was she the writer of the advertisement? He felt sure of it, for no
better reason than this: the moment he looked at her she interested him.
It was an interest new to Linley, in his experience of himself. There was
nothing to appeal to his admiration (by way of his senses) in the pale,
worn young creature who stood near the door, resigned beforehand to
whatever reception she might meet with. The poor teacher made him think
of his happy young wife at home--of his pretty little girl, the spoiled
child of the household. He looked at Sydney Westerfield with a heartfelt
compassion which did honor to them both.

“What do you mean by coming here?” Miss Wigger inquired.

She answered gently, but not timidly. The tone in which the mistress had
spoken had evidently not shaken her resolution, so far.

“I wish to know,” she said, “if this gentleman desires to see me on the
subject of my advertisement?”

“Your advertisement?” Miss Wigger repeated. “Miss Westerfield! how dare
you beg for employment in a newspaper, without asking my leave?”

“I only waited to tell you what I had done, till I knew whether my
advertisement would be answered or not.”

She spoke as calmly as before, still submitting to the insolent
authority of the schoolmistress with a steady fortitude very remarkable
in any girl--and especially in a girl whose face revealed a sensitive
nature. Linley approached her, and said his few kind words before Miss
Wigger could assert herself for the third time.

“I am afraid I have taken a liberty in answering you personally, when I
ought to have answered by letter. My only excuse is that I have no time
to arrange for an interview, in London, by correspondence. I live in
Scotland, and I am obliged to return by the mail to-night.”

He paused. She was looking at him. Did she understand him?

She understood him only too well. For the first time, poor soul, in the
miserable years of her school life, she saw eyes that rested on her
with the sympathy that is too truly felt to be uttered in words. The
admirable resignation which had learned its first hard lesson under
her mother’s neglect--which had endured, in after-years, the daily
persecution that heartless companionship so well knows how to
inflict--failed to sustain her, when one kind look from a stranger
poured its balm into the girl’s sore heart. Her head sank; her wasted
figure trembled; a few tears dropped slowly on the bosom of her shabby
dress. She tried, desperately tried, to control herself. “I beg your
pardon, sir,” was all she could say; “I am not very well.”

Miss Wigger tapped her on the shoulder and pointed to the door. “Are you
well enough to see your way out?” she asked.

Linley turned on the wretch with a mind divided between wonder and
disgust. “Good God, what has she done to deserve being treated in that
way?” he asked.

Miss Wigger’s mouth widened; Miss Wigger’s forehead developed new
wrinkles. To own it plainly, the schoolmistress smiled.

When it is of serious importance to a man to become acquainted with a
woman’s true nature--say, when he contemplates marriage--his one poor
chance of arriving at a right conclusion is to find himself provoked by
exasperating circumstances, and to fly into a passion. If the lady flies
into a passion on her side, he may rely on it that her faults are more
than balanced by her good qualities. If, on the other hand, she exhibits
the most admirable self-control, and sets him an example which ought to
make him ashamed of himself, he has seen a bad sign, and he will do well
to remember it.

Miss Wigger’s self-control put Herbert Linley in the wrong, before she
took the trouble of noticing what he had said.

“If you were not out of temper,” she replied, “I might have told you
that I don’t allow my house to be made an office for the engagement of
governesses. As it is, I merely remind you that your carriage is at the
door.”

He took the only course that was open to him; he took his hat.

Sydney turned away to leave the room. Linley opened the door for her.
“Don’t be discouraged,” he whispered as she passed him; “you shall
hear from me.” Having said this, he made his parting bow to the
schoolmistress. Miss Wigger held up a peremptory forefinger, and stopped
him on his way out. He waited, wondering what she would do next. She
rang the bell.

“You are in the house of a gentlewoman,” Miss Wigger explained. “My
servant attends visitors, when they leave me.” A faint smell of soap
made itself felt in the room; the maid appeared, wiping her smoking arms
on her apron. “Door. I wish you good-morning”--were the last words of
Miss Wigger.


Leaving the house, Linley slipped a bribe into the servant’s hand. “I
am going to write to Miss Westerfield,” he said. “Will you see that she
gets my letter?”

“That I will!”

He was surprised by the fervor with which the girl answered him.
Absolutely without vanity, he had no suspicion of the value which his
winning manner, his kind brown eyes, and his sunny smile had conferred
on his little gift of money. A handsome man was an eighth wonder of the
world, at Miss Wigger’s school.

At the first stationer’s shop that he passed, he stopped the carriage
and wrote his letter.

“I shall be glad indeed if I can offer you a happier life than the life
you are leading now. It rests with you to help me do this. Will you send
me the address of your parents, if they are in London, or the name of
any friend with whom I can arrange to give you a trial as governess to
my little girl? I am waiting your answer in the neighborhood. If any
hinderance should prevent you from replying at once, I add the name of
the hotel at which I am staying--so that you may telegraph to me, before
I leave London to-night.”

The stationer’s boy, inspired by a private view of half-a-crown, set off
at a run--and returned at a run with a reply.

“I have neither parents nor friends, and I have just been dismissed from
my employment at the school. Without references to speak for me, I must
not take advantage of your generous offer. Will you help me to bear my
disappointment, permitting me to see you, for a few minutes only, at
your hotel? Indeed, indeed, sir, I am not forgetful of what I owe to my
respect for you, and my respect for myself. I only ask leave to satisfy
you that I am not quite unworthy of the interest which you have been
pleased to feel in--S.W.”

In those sad words, Sydney Westerfield announced that she had completed
her education.




THE STORY




FIRST BOOK.




Chapter I. Mrs. Presty Presents Herself.

NOT far from the source of the famous river, which rises in the
mountains between Loch Katrine and Loch Lomond, and divides the
Highlands and the Lowlands of Scotland, travelers arrive at the
venerable gray walls of Mount Morven; and, after consulting their guide
books, ask permission to see the house.

What would be called, in a modern place of residence, the first
floor, is reserved for the occupation of the family. The great hall of
entrance, and its quaint old fireplace; the ancient rooms on the same
level opening out of it, are freely shown to strangers. Cultivated
travelers express various opinions relating to the family portraits,
and the elaborately carved ceilings. The uninstructed public declines
to trouble itself with criticism. It looks up at the towers and the
loopholes, the battlements and the rusty old guns, which still bear
witness to the perils of past times when the place was a fortress--it
enters the gloomy hall, walks through the stone-paved rooms, stares at
the faded pictures, and wonders at the lofty chimney-pieces hopelessly
out of reach. Sometimes it sits on chairs which are as cold and as hard
as iron, or timidly feels the legs of immovable tables which might be
legs of elephants so far as size is concerned. When these marvels have
been duly admired, and the guide books are shut up, the emancipated
tourists, emerging into the light and air, all find the same social
problem presented by a visit to Mount Morven: “How can the family live
in such a place as that?”

If these strangers on their travels had been permitted to ascend to the
first floor, and had been invited (for example) to say good-night to
Mrs. Linley’s pretty little daughter, they would have seen the stone
walls of Kitty’s bed-chamber snugly covered with velvet hangings which
kept out the cold; they would have trod on a doubly-laid carpet, which
set the chilly influences of the pavement beneath it at defiance; they
would have looked at a bright little bed, of the last new pattern,
worthy of a child’s delicious sleep; and they would only have discovered
that the room was three hundred years old when they had drawn aside the
window curtains, and had revealed the adamantine solidity of the outer
walls. Or, if they had been allowed to pursue their investigations a
little further, and had found their way next into Mrs. Linley’s sitting
room, here again a transformation scene would have revealed more modern
luxury, presented in the perfection which implies restraint within the
limits of good taste. But on this occasion, instead of seeing the head
of a lively little child on the pillow, side by side with the head of
her doll, they would have encountered an elderly lady of considerable
size, fast asleep and snoring in a vast armchair, with a book on
her lap. The married men among the tourists would have recognized a
mother-in-law, and would have set an excellent example to the rest; that
is to say, the example of leaving the room.

The lady composed under the soporific influence of literature was a
person of importance in the house--holding rank as Mrs. Linley’s mother;
and being otherwise noticeable for having married two husbands, and
survived them both.

The first of these gentlemen--the Right Honorable Joseph Norman--had
been a member of Parliament, and had taken office under Government. Mrs.
Linley was his one surviving child. He died at an advanced age; leaving
his handsome widow (young enough, as she was always ready to mention,
to be his daughter) well provided for, and an object of matrimonial
aspiration to single gentlemen who admired size in a woman, set off by
money. After hesitating for some little time, Mrs. Norman accepted the
proposal of the ugliest and dullest man among the ranks of her admirers.
Why she became the wife of Mr. Presty (known in commercial circles as a
merchant enriched by the sale of vinegar) she was never able to explain.
Why she lamented him, with tears of sincere sorrow, when he died after
two years of married life, was a mystery which puzzled her nearest and
dearest friends. And why when she indulged (a little too frequently) in
recollections of her married life, she persisted in putting obscure Mr.
Presty on a level with distinguished Mr. Norman, was a secret which
this remarkable woman had never been known to reveal. Presented by
their widow with the strictest impartiality to the general view, the
characters of these two husbands combined, by force of contrast, the
ideal of manly perfection. That is to say, the vices of Mr. Norman were
the virtues of Mr. Presty; and the vices of Mr. Presty were the virtues
of Mr. Norman.

Returning to the sitting-room after bidding Kitty goodnight, Mrs. Linley
discovered the old lady asleep, and saw that the book on her mother’s
lap was sliding off. Before she could check the downward movement, the
book fell on the floor, and Mrs. Presty woke.

“Oh, mamma, I am so sorry! I was just too late to catch it.”

“It doesn’t matter, my dear. I daresay I should go to sleep again, if I
went on with my novel.”

“Is it really as dull as that?”

“Dull?” Mrs. Presty repeated. “You are evidently not aware of what the
new school of novel writing is doing. The new school provides the public
with soothing fiction.”

“Are you speaking seriously, mamma?”

“Seriously, Catherine--and gratefully. These new writers are so good to
old women. No story to excite our poor nerves; no improper characters to
cheat us out of our sympathies, no dramatic situations to frighten us;
exquisite management of details (as the reviews say), and a masterly
anatomy of human motives which--I know what I mean, my dear, but I can’t
explain it.”

“I think I understand, mamma. A masterly anatomy of human motives which
is in itself a motive of human sleep. No; I won’t borrow your novel just
now. I don’t want to go to sleep; I am thinking of Herbert in London.”

Mrs. Presty consulted her watch.

“Your husband is no longer in London,” she announced; “he has begun his
journey home. Give me the railway guide, and I’ll tell you when he will
be here tomorrow. You may trust me, Catherine, to make no mistakes. Mr.
Presty’s wonderful knowledge of figures has been of the greatest use to
me in later life. Thanks to his instructions, I am the only person in
the house who can grapple with the intricacies of our railway system.
Your poor father, Mr. Norman, could never understand time-tables and
never attempted to conceal his deficiencies. He had none of the vanity
(harmless vanity, perhaps) which led poor Mr. Presty to express positive
opinions on matters of which he knew nothing, such as pictures and
music. What do you want, Malcolm?”

The servant to whom this question was addressed answered: “A telegram,
ma’am, for the mistress.”

Mrs. Linley recoiled from the message when the man offered it to her.
Not usually a very demonstrative person, the feeling of alarm which had
seized on her only expressed itself in a sudden change of color. “An
accident!” she said faintly. “An accident on the railway!”

Mrs. Presty opened the telegram.

“If you had been the wife of a Cabinet Minister,” she said to her
daughter, “you would have been too well used to telegrams to let them
frighten you. Mr. Presty (who received his telegrams at his office) was
not quite just to the memory of my first husband. He used to blame Mr.
Norman for letting me see his telegrams. But Mr. Presty’s nature had
all the poetry in which Mr. Norman’s nature was deficient. He saw the
angelic side of women--and thought telegrams and business, and all that
sort of thing, unworthy of our mission. I don’t exactly understand what
our mission is--”

“Mamma! mamma! is Herbert hurt?”

“Stuff and nonsense! Nobody is hurt; there has been no accident.”

“They why does he telegraph to me?”

Hitherto, Mrs. Presty had only looked at the message. She now read it
through attentively to the end. Her face assumed an expression of stern
distrust. She shook her head.

“Read it yourself,” she answered; “and remember what I told you, when
you trusted your husband to find a governess for my grandchild. I said:
‘You do not know men as I do.’ I hope you may not live to repent it.”

Mrs. Linley was too fond of her husband to let this pass. “Why shouldn’t
I trust him?” she asked. “He was going to London on business--and it was
an excellent opportunity.”

Mrs. Presty disposed of this weak defense of her daughter’s conduct by
waving her hand. “Read your telegram,” she repeated with dignity, “and
judge for yourself.”

Mrs. Linley read:

“I have engaged a governess. She will travel in the same train with
me. I think I ought to prepare you to receive a person whom you may
be surprised to see. She is very young, and very inexperienced; quite
unlike the ordinary run of governesses. When you hear how cruelly the
poor girl has been used, I am sure you will sympathize with her as I
do.”

Mrs. Linley laid down the message, with a smile.

“Poor dear Herbert!” she said tenderly. “After we have been eight years
married, is he really afraid that I shall be jealous? Mamma! Why are you
looking so serious?”

Mrs. Presty took the telegram from her daughter and read extracts from
it with indignant emphasis of voice and manner.

“Travels in the same train with him. Very young, and very inexperienced.
And he sympathizes with her. Ha! I know the men, Catherine--I know the
men!”



Chapter II. The Governess Enters.

Mr. Herbert Linley arrived at his own house in the forenoon of the next
day. Mrs. Linley, running out to the head of the stairs to meet her
husband, saw him approaching her without a traveling companion. “Where
is the governess?” she asked--when the first salutes allowed her the
opportunity of speaking.

“On her way to bed, poor soul, under the care of the housekeeper,”
 Linley answered.

“Anything infectious, my dear Herbert?” Mrs. Presty inquired appearing
at the breakfast-room door.

Linley addressed his reply to his wife:

“Nothing more serious, Catherine, than want of strength. She was in such
a state of fatigue, after our long night journey, that I had to lift her
out of the carriage.”

Mrs. Presty listened with an appearance of the deepest interest. “Quite
a novelty in the way of a governess,” she said. “May I ask what her name
is?”

“Sydney Westerfield.”

Mrs. Presty looked at her daughter and smiled satirically.

Mrs. Linley remonstrated.

“Surely,” she said, “you don’t object to the young lady’s name!”

“I have no opinion to offer, Catherine. I don’t believe in the name.”

“Oh, mamma, do you suspect that it’s an assumed name?”

“My dear, I haven’t a doubt that it is. May I ask another question?”
 the old lady continued, turning to Linley. “What references did Miss
Westerfield give you?”

“No references at all.”

Mrs. Presty rose with the alacrity of a young woman, and hurried to the
door. “Follow my example,” she said to her daughter, on her way out.
“Lock up your jewel-box.”

Linley drew a deep breath of relief when he was left alone with
his wife. “What makes your mother so particularly disagreeable this
morning?” he inquired.

“She doesn’t approve, dear, of my leaving it to you to choose a
governess for Kitty.”

“Where is Kitty?”

“Out on her pony for a ride over the hills. Why did you send a telegram,
Herbert, to prepare me for the governess? Did you really think I might
be jealous of Miss Westerfield?”

Linley burst out laughing. “No such idea entered my head,” he answered.
“It isn’t _in_ you, my dear, to be jealous.”

Mrs. Linley was not quite satisfied with this view of her character. Her
husband’s well-intended compliment reminded her that there are occasions
when any woman may be jealous, no matter how generous and how gentle she
may be. “We won’t go quite so far as that,” she said to him, “because--”
 She stopped, unwilling to dwell too long on a delicate subject. He
jocosely finished the sentence for her. “Because we don’t know what may
happen in the future?” he suggested; making another mistake by making a
joke.

Mrs. Linley returned to the subject of the governess.

“I don’t at all say what my mother says,” she resumed; “but was it
not just a little indiscreet to engage Miss Westerfield without any
references?”

“Unless I am utterly mistaken,” Linley replied, “you would have been
quite as indiscreet, in my place. If you had seen the horrible woman who
persecuted and insulted her--”

His wife interrupted him. “How did all this happen, Herbert? Who first
introduced you to Miss Westerfield?”

Linley mentioned the advertisement, and described his interview with the
schoolmistress. Having next acknowledged that he had received a visit
from Miss Westerfield herself, he repeated all that she had been able
to tell him of her father’s wasted life and melancholy end. Really
interested by this time, Mrs. Linley was eager for more information. Her
husband hesitated. “I would rather you heard the rest of it from Miss
Westerfield,” he said, “in my absence.”

“Why in your absence?”

“Because she can speak to you more freely, when I am not present. Hear
her tell her own story, and then let me know whether you think I have
made a mistake. I submit to your decision beforehand, whichever way it
may incline.”

Mrs. Linley rewarded him with a kiss. If a married stranger had seen
them, at that moment, he would have been reminded of forgotten days--the
days of his honeymoon.

“And now,” Linley resumed, “suppose we talk a little about ourselves. I
haven’t seen any brother yet. Where is Randal?”

“Staying at the farm to look after your interests. We expect him to
come back to-day. Ah, Herbert, what do we not all owe to that dear good
brother of yours? There is really no end to his kindness. The last of
our poor Highland families who have emigrated to America have had their
expenses privately paid by Randal. The wife has written to me, and has
let out the secret. There is an American newspaper, among the letters
that are waiting your brother’s return, sent to him as a little mark
of attention by these good grateful people.” Having alluded to the
neighbors who had left Scotland, Mrs. Linley was reminded of other
neighbors who had remained. She was still relating events of local
interest, when the clock interrupted her by striking the hour of the
nursery dinner. What had become of Kitty? Mrs. Linley rose and rang the
bell to make inquiries.

On the point of answering, the servant looked round at the open door
behind him. He drew aside, and revealed Kitty, in the corridor, hand
in hand with Sydney Westerfield--who timidly hesitated at entering the
room. “Here she is mamma,” cried the child. “I think she’s afraid of
you; help me to pull her in.”

Mrs. Linley advanced to receive the new member of her household, with
the irresistible grace and kindness which charmed every stranger who
approached her. “Oh, it’s all right,” said Kitty. “Syd likes me, and I
like Syd. What do you think? She lived in London with a cruel woman who
never gave her enough to eat. See what a good girl I am? I’m beginning
to feed her already.” Kitty pulled a box of sweetmeats out of her
pocket, and handed it to the governess with a tap on the lid, suggestive
of an old gentleman offering a pinch of snuff to a friend.

“My dear child, you mustn’t speak of Miss Westerfield in that way! Pray
excuse her,” said Mrs. Linley, turning to Sydney with a smile; “I am
afraid she has been disturbing you in your room.”

Sydney’s silent answer touched the mother’s heart; she kissed her little
friend. “I hope you will let her call me Syd,” she said gently; “it
reminds me of a happier time.” Her voice faltered; she could say no
more. Kitty explained, with the air of a grown person encouraging a
child. “I know all about it, mamma. She means the time when her papa was
alive. She lost her papa when she was a little girl like me. I didn’t
disturb her. I only said, ‘My name’s Kitty; may I get up on the bed?’
And she was quite willing; and we talked. And I helped her to dress.”
 Mrs. Linley led Sydney to the sofa, and stopped the flow of her
daughter’s narrative. The look, the voice, the manner of the governess
had already made their simple appeal to her generous nature. When her
husband took Kitty’s hand to lead her with him out of the room, she
whispered as he passed: “You have done quite right; I haven’t a doubt of
it now!”



Chapter III. Mrs. Presty Changes Her Mind.


The two ladies were alone.

Widely as the lot in life of one differed from the lot in life of the
other, they presented a contrast in personal appearance which was more
remarkable still. In the prime of life, tall and fair--the beauty of her
delicate complexion and her brilliant blue eyes rivaled by the charm of
a figure which had arrived at its mature perfection of development--Mrs.
Linley sat side by side with a frail little dark-eyed creature, thin
and pale, whose wasted face bore patient witness to the three cruelest
privations under which youth can suffer--want of fresh air, want of
nourishment, and want of kindness. The gentle mistress of the house
wondered sadly if this lost child of misfortune was capable of seeing
the brighter prospect before her that promised enjoyment of a happier
life to come.

“I was afraid to disturb you while you were resting,” Mrs. Linley said.
“Let me hope that my housekeeper has done what I might have done myself,
if I had seen you when you arrived.”

“The housekeeper has been all that is good and kind to me, madam.”

“Don’t call me ‘madam’; it sounds so formal--call me ‘Mrs. Linley.’ You
must not think of beginning to teach Kitty till you feel stronger and
better. I see but too plainly that you have not been happy. Don’t think
of your past life, or speak of your past life.”

“Forgive me, Mrs. Linley; my past life is my one excuse for having
ventured to come into this house.”

“In what way, my dear?”

At the moment when that question was put, the closed curtains which
separated the breakfast-room from the library were softly parted in
the middle. A keen old face, strongly marked by curiosity and distrust,
peeped through--eyed the governess with stern scrutiny--and retired
again into hiding.

The introduction of a stranger (without references) into the intimacy
of the family circle was, as Mrs. Presty viewed it, a crisis in domestic
history. Conscience, with its customary elasticity, adapted itself to
the emergency, and Linley’s mother-in-law stole information behind the
curtain--in Linley’s best interests, it is quite needless to say.

The talk of the two ladies went on, without a suspicion on either side
that it was overheard by a third person.

Sydney explained herself.

“If I had led a happier life,” she said, “I might have been able to
resist Mr. Linley’s kindness. I concealed nothing from him. He knew that
I had no friends to speak for me; he knew that I had been dismissed from
my employment at the school. Oh, Mrs. Linley, everything I said which
would have made other people suspicious of me made _him_ feel for me!
I began to wonder whether he was an angel or a man. If he had not
prevented it, I should have fallen on my knees before him. Hard looks
and hard words I could have endured patiently, but I had not seen a kind
look, I had not heard a kind word, for more years than I can reckon up.
That is all I can say for myself; I leave the rest to your mercy.”

“Say my sympathy,” Mrs. Linley answered, “and you need say no more. But
there is one thing I should like to know. You have not spoken to me of
your mother. Have you lost both your parents?”

“No.”

“Then you were brought up by your mother?”

“Yes.”

“You surely had some experience of kindness when you were a child?”

A third short answer would have been no very grateful return for Mrs.
Linley’s kindness. Sydney had no choice but to say plainly what her
experience of her mother had been.

“Are there such women in the world!” Mrs. Linley exclaimed. “Where is
your mother now?”

“In America--I think.”

“You think?”

“My mother married again,” said Sydney. “She went to America with her
husband and my little brother, six years ago.”

“And left you behind?”

“Yes.”

“And has she never written to you?”

“Never.”

This time, Mrs. Linley kept silence; not without an effort. Thinking of
Sydney’s mother--and for one morbid moment seeing her own little darling
in Sydney’s place--she was afraid to trust herself to speak while the
first impression was vividly present to her mind.

“I will only hope,” she replied, after waiting a little, “that some kind
person pitied and helped you when you were deserted. Any change must
have been for the better after that. Who took charge of you?”

“My mother’s sister took charge of me, an elder sister, who kept a
school. The time when I was most unhappy was the time when my aunt began
to teach me. ‘If you don’t want to be beaten, and kept on bread and
water,’ she said, ‘learn, you ugly little wretch, and be quick about
it.”’

“Did she speak in that shameful way to the other girls?”

“Oh, no! I was taken into her school for nothing, and, young as I was,
I was expected to earn my food and shelter by being fit to teach the
lowest class. The girls hated me. It was such a wretched life that
I hardly like to speak of it now. I ran away, and I was caught, and
severely punished. When I grew older and wiser, I tried to find some
other employment for myself. The elder girls bought penny journals that
published stories. They were left about now and then in the bedrooms. I
read the stories when I had the chance. Even my ignorance discovered how
feeble and foolish they were. They encouraged me to try if I could write
a story myself; I couldn’t do worse, and I might do better. I sent my
manuscript to the editor. It was accepted and printed--but when I wrote
and asked him if he would pay me something for it, he refused. Dozens
of ladies, he said, wrote stories for him for nothing. It didn’t matter
what the stories were. Anything would do for his readers, so long as the
characters were lords and ladies, and there was plenty of love in it.
My next attempt to get away from the school ended in another
disappointment. A poor old man, who had once been an actor, used to come
to us twice a week, and get a few shillings by teaching the girls to
read aloud. He was called ‘Professor of English Literature,’ and he
taught out of a ragged book of verses which smelled of his pipe. I
learned one of the pieces and repeated it to him, and asked if there was
any hope of my being able to go on the stage. He was very kind; he told
me the truth. ‘My dear, you have no dramatic ability; God forbid you
should go on the stage.’ I went back again to the penny journals, and
tried a new editor. He seemed to have more money than the other one; or
perhaps he was kinder. I got ten shillings from him for my story. With
that money I made my last attempt--I advertised for a situation as
governess. If Mr. Linley had not seen my advertisement, I might have
starved in the streets. When my aunt heard of it, she insisted on my
begging her pardon before the whole school. Do girls get half maddened
by persecution? If they do, I think I must have been one of those girls.
I refused to beg pardon; and I was dismissed from my situation without a
character. Will you think me very foolish? I shut my eyes again, when
I woke in my delicious bed to-day. I was afraid that the room, and
everything in it, was a dream.” She looked round, and started to her
feet. “Oh, here’s a lady! Shall I go away?”

The curtains hanging over the entrance to the library were opened for
the second time. With composure and dignity, the lady who had startled
Sydney entered the room.

“Have you been reading in the library?” Mrs. Linley asked. And Mrs.
Presty answered: “No, Catherine; I have been listening.”

Mrs. Linley looked at her mother; her lovely complexion reddened with a
deep blush.

“Introduce me to Miss Westerfield,” Mrs. Presty proceeded, as coolly as
ever.

Mrs. Linley showed some hesitation. What would the governess think of
her mother? Perfectly careless of what the governess might think, Mrs.
Presty crossed the room and introduced herself.

“Miss Westerfield, I am Mrs. Linley’s mother. And I am, in one respect,
a remarkable person. When I form an opinion and find it’s the opinion of
a fool, I am not in the least ashamed to change my mind. I have changed
my mind about you. Shake hands.”

Sydney respectfully obeyed.

“Sit down again.” Sydney returned to her chair.

“I had the worst possible opinion of you,” Mrs. Presty resumed, “before
I had the pleasure of listening on the other side of the curtain. It has
been my good fortune--what’s your Christian name? Did I hear it? or have
I forgotten it? ‘Sydney,’ eh? Very well. I was about to say, Sydney,
that it has been my good fortune to be intimately associated, in early
life, with two remarkable characters. Husbands of mine, in short,
whose influence over me has, I am proud to say, set death and burial at
defiance. Between them they have made my mind the mind of a man. I judge
for myself. The opinions of others (when they don’t happen to agree with
mine) I regard as chaff to be scattered to the winds. No, Catherine, I
am not wandering. I am pointing out to a young person, who has her way
to make in the world, the vast importance, on certain occasions, of
possessing an independent mind. If I had been ashamed to listen behind
those curtains, there is no injury that my stupid prejudices might not
have inflicted on this unfortunate girl. As it is, I have heard her
story, and I do her justice. Count on me, Sydney, as your friend, and
now get up again. My grandchild (never accustomed to wait for anything
since the day when she was born) is waiting dinner for you. She is at
this moment shouting for her governess, as King Richard (I am a great
reader of Shakespeare) once shouted for his horse. The maid (you will
recognize her as a stout person suffering under tight stays) is waiting
outside to show you the way to the nursery. _Au revoir._ Stop! I should
like to judge the purity of your French accent. Say ‘au revoir’ to me.
Thank you.--Weak in her French, Catherine,” Mrs. Presty pronounced, when
the door had closed on the governess; “but what can you expect, poor
wretch, after such a life as she has led? Now we are alone, I have a
word of advice for your private ear. We have much to anticipate from
Miss Westerfield that is pleasant and encouraging. But I don’t conceal
it from myself or from you, we have also something to fear.”

“To fear?” Mrs. Linley repeated. “I don’t understand you.”

“Never mind, Catherine, whether you understand me or not. I want more
information. Tell me what your husband said to you about this young
lady?”

Wondering at the demon of curiosity which appeared to possess her
mother, Mrs. Linley obeyed. Listening throughout with the closest
attention, Mrs. Presty reckoned up the items of information, and pointed
the moral to be drawn from them by worldly experience.

“First obstacle in the way of her moral development, her father--tried,
found guilty, and dying in prison. Second obstacle, her mother--an
unnatural wretch who neglected and deserted her own flesh and blood.
Third obstacle, her mother’s sister--being her mother over again in an
aggravated form. People who only look at the surface of things might
ask what we gain by investigating Miss Westerfield’s past life. We gain
this: we know what to expect of Miss Westerfield in the future.”

“I for one,” Mrs. Linley interposed, “expect everything that is good and
true.”

“Say she’s naturally an angel,” Mrs. Presty answered; “and I won’t
contradict you. But do pray hear how my experience looks at it. I
remember what a life she has led, and I ask myself if any human creature
could have suffered as that girl has suffered without being damaged by
it. Among those damnable people--I beg your pardon, my dear; Mr.
Norman sometimes used strong language, and it breaks out of me now and
then--the good qualities of that unfortunate young person can _not_ have
always resisted the horrid temptations and contaminations about her.
Hundreds of times she must have had deceit forced on her; she must have
lied, through ungovernable fear; she must have been left (at a critical
time in her life, mind!) with no more warning against the insidious
advances of the passions than--than--I’m repeating what Mr. Presty said
of a niece of his own, who went to a bad school at Paris; and I don’t
quite remember what comparisons that eloquent man used when he was
excited. But I know what I mean. I like Miss Westerfield; I believe Miss
Westerfield will come out well in the end. But I don’t forget that she
is going to lead a new life here--a life of luxury, my dear; a life of
ease and health and happiness--and God only knows what evil seed sown
in her, in her past life, may not spring up under new influences. I tell
you we must be careful; I tell you we must keep our eyes open. And so
much the better for Her. And so much the better for Us.”

Mrs. Presty’s wise and wary advice (presented unfavorably, it must be
owned, through her inveterately quaint way of expressing herself) failed
to produce the right impression on her daughter’s mind. Mrs. Linley
replied in the tone of a person who was unaffectedly shocked.

“Oh, mamma, I never knew you so unjust before! You can’t have heard all
that Miss Westerfield said to me. You don’t know her, as I know her. So
patient, so forgiving, so grateful to Herbert.”

“So grateful to Herbert.” Mrs. Presty looked at her daughter in silent
surprise. There could be no doubt about it; Mrs. Linley failed entirely
to see any possibilities of future danger in the grateful feeling of her
sensitive governess toward her handsome husband. At this exhibition of
simplicity, the old lady’s last reserves of endurance gave way: she rose
to go. “You have an excellent heart, Catherine,” she remarked; “but as
for your head--”

“Well, and what of my head?”

“It’s always beautifully dressed, my dear, by your maid.” With that
parting shot, Mrs. Presty took her departure by way of the library.
Almost at the same moment, the door of the breakfast-room was opened. A
young man advanced, and shook hands cordially with Mrs. Linley.



Chapter IV. Randal Receives His Correspondence.


Self-revealed by the family likeness as Herbert’s brother, Randal Linley
was nevertheless greatly Herbert’s inferior in personal appearance.
His features were in no way remarkable for manly beauty. In stature, he
hardly reached the middle height; and young as he was, either bad habit
or physical weakness had so affected the upper part of his figure that
he stooped. But with these, and other disadvantages, there was something
in his eyes, and in his smile--the outward expression perhaps of all
that was modestly noble in his nature--so irresistible in its attractive
influence that men, women, and children felt the charm alike. Inside of
the house, and outside of the house, everybody was fond of Randal; even
Mrs. Presty included.

“Have you seen a new face among us, since you returned?” were his
sister-in-law’s first words. Randal answered that he had seen Miss
Westerfield. The inevitable question followed. What did he think of her?
“I’ll tell you in a week or two more,” he replied.

“No! tell me at once.”

“I don’t like trusting my first impression; I have a bad habit of
jumping to conclusions.”

“Jump to a conclusion to please me. Do you think she’s pretty?”

Randal smiled and looked away. “Your governess,” he replied, “looks
out of health, and (perhaps for that reason) strikes me as being
insignificant and ugly. Let us see what our fine air and our easy life
here will do for her. In so young a woman as she is, I am prepared
for any sort of transformation. We may be all admiring pretty Miss
Westerfield before another month is over our heads.--Have any letters
come for me while I have been away?”

He went into the library and returned with his letters. “This will amuse
Kitty,” he said, handing his sister-in-law the illustrated New York
newspaper, to which she had already referred in speaking to her husband.

Mrs. Linley examined the engravings--and turned back again to look once
more at an illustration which had interested her. A paragraph on the
same page caught her attention. She had hardly glanced at the first
words before a cry of alarm escaped her. “Dreadful news for Miss
Westerfield!” she exclaimed. “Read it, Randal.”

He read these words:


“The week’s list of insolvent traders includes an Englishman named James
Bellbridge, formerly connected with a disreputable saloon in this city.
Bellbridge is under suspicion of having caused the death of his wife in
a fit of delirium tremens. The unfortunate woman had been married,
for the first time, to one of the English aristocracy--the Honorable
Roderick Westerfield--whose trial for casting away a ship under his
command excited considerable interest in London some years since.
The melancholy circumstances of the case are complicated by the
disappearance, on the day of the murder, of the woman’s young son by her
first husband. The poor boy is supposed to have run away in terror from
his miserable home, and the police are endeavoring to discover some
trace of him. It is reported that another child of the first marriage (a
daughter) is living in England. But nothing is known about her.”


“Has your governess any relations in England?” Randal asked.

“Only an aunt, who has treated her in the most inhuman manner.”

“Serious news for Miss Westerfield, as you say,” Randal resumed. “And,
as I think, serious news for us. Here is a mere girl--a poor friendless
creature--absolutely dependent on our protection. What are we to do if
anything happens, in the future, to alter our present opinion of her?”

“Nothing of the sort is likely to happen,” Mrs. Linley declared.

“Let us hope not,” Randal said, gravely.



Chapter V. Randal Writes to New York.


The members of the family at Mount Morven consulted together, before
Sydney Westerfield was informed of her brother’s disappearance and of
her mother’s death.

Speaking first, as master of the house, Herbert Linley offered his
opinion without hesitation. His impulsive kindness shrank from the
prospect of reviving the melancholy recollections associated with
Sydney’s domestic life. “Why distress the poor child, just as she is
beginning to feel happy among us?” he asked. “Give me the newspaper; I
shan’t feel easy till I have torn it up.”

His wife drew the newspaper out of his reach. “Wait a little,” she said,
quietly; “some of us may feel that it is no part of our duty to conceal
the truth.”

Mrs. Presty spoke next. To the surprise of the family council, she
agreed with her son-in-law.

“Somebody must speak out,” the old lady began; “and I mean to set the
example. Telling the truth,” she declared, turning severely to her
daughter, “is a more complicated affair than you seem to think. It’s a
question of morality, of course; but--in family circles, my dear--it’s
sometimes a question of convenience as well. Is it convenient to upset
my granddaughter’s governess, just as she is entering on her new duties?
Certainly not! Good heavens, what does it matter to my young friend
Sydney whether her unnatural mother lives or dies? Herbert, I second
your proposal to tear up the paper with the greatest pleasure.”

Herbert, sitting next to Randal, laid his hand affectionately on his
brother’s shoulder. “Are you on our side?” he asked.

Randal hesitated.

“I feel inclined to agree with you,” he said to Herbert. “It does seem
hard to recall Miss Westerfield to the miserable life that she has led,
and to do it in the way of all others which must try her fortitude most
cruelly. At the same time--”

“Oh, don’t spoil what you have said by seeing the other side of the
question!” cried his brother “You have already put it admirably; leave
it as it is.”

“At the same time,” Randal gently persisted, “I have heard no reasons
which satisfy me that we have a right to keep Miss Westerfield in
ignorance of what has happened.”

This serious view of the question in debate highly diverted Mrs. Presty.
“I do not like that man,” she announced, pointing to Randal; “he
always amuses me. Look at him now! He doesn’t know which side he is on,
himself.”

“He is on my side,” Herbert declared.

“Not he!”

Herbert consulted his brother. “What do you say yourself?”

“I don’t know,” Randal answered.

“There!” cried Mrs. Presty. “What did I tell you?”

Randal tried to set his strange reply in the right light. “I only mean,”
 he explained, “that I want a little time to think.”

Herbert gave up the dispute and appealed to his wife. “You have still
got the American newspaper in your hand,” he said. “What do you mean to
do with it?”

Quietly and firmly Mrs. Linley answered: “I mean to show it to Miss
Westerfield.”

“Against my opinion? Against your mother’s opinion?” Herbert asked.
“Have we no influence over you? Do as Randal does--take time, my dear,
to think.”

She answered this with her customary calmness of manner and sweetness of
tone. “I am afraid I must appear obstinate; but it is indeed true that I
want no time to think; my duty is too plain to me.”

Her husband and her mother listened to her in astonishment. Too amiable
and too happy--and it must be added too indolent--to assert herself in
the ordinary emergencies of family life, Mrs. Linley only showed of what
metal she was made on the very rare occasions when the latent firmness
in her nature was stirred to its innermost depths. The general
experience of this sweet-tempered and delightful woman, ranging over
long intervals of time, was the only experience which remained in the
memories of the persons about her. In bygone days, they had been amazed
when her unexpected readiness and firmness of decision presented an
exception to a general rule--just as they were amazed now.

Herbert tried a last remonstrance. “Is it possible, Catherine, that you
don’t see the cruelty of showing that newspaper to Miss Westerfield?”

Even this appeal to Mrs. Linley’s sympathies failed to shake her
resolution. “You may trust me to be careful,” was all she said in reply;
“I shall prepare her as tenderly for the sad news from America, as if
she was a daughter of my own.”

Hearing this, Mrs. Presty showed a sudden interest in the proceedings
“When do you mean to begin?” she asked.

“At once, mamma.”

Mrs. Presty broke up the meeting on the spot. “Wait till I am out of
the way,” she stipulated. “Do you object to Herbert giving me his arm?
Distressing scenes are not in his line or in mine.”

Mrs. Linley made no objection. Herbert resigned himself (not at all
unwillingly) to circumstances. Arm in arm, he and his wife’s mother left
the room.

Randal showed no intention of following them; he had given himself time
to think. “We are all wrong, Catherine,” he said; “and you alone are
right. What can I do to help you?”

She took his hand gratefully. “Always kind! Never thinking of yourself!
I will see Miss Westerfield in my own room. Wait here, in case I want
you.”

After a much shorter absence than Randal anticipated, Mrs. Linley
returned. “Has it been very distressing?” he asked, seeing the traces of
tears in her eyes.

“There are noble qualities,” she answered, “in that poor ill-used
girl. Her one thought, as soon as she began to understand my motive in
speaking to her, was not for herself, but for me. Even you, a man, must
have felt the tears in your eyes, if you had heard her promise that
I should suffer no further anxiety on her account. ‘You shall see no
distressing change in me,’ she said, ‘when we meet to-morrow.’ All she
asked was to be left in her room for the rest of the day. I feel sure
of her resolution to control herself; and yet I should like to encourage
her if I can. Her chief sorrow (as it seems to me) must be--not for
the mother who has so shamefully neglected her--but for the poor little
brother, a castaway lost in a strange land. Can we do nothing to relieve
her anxiety?”

“I can write,” Randal said, “to a man whom I know in New York; a lawyer
in large practice.”

“The very person we want! Write--pray write by today’s post.”

The letter was dispatched. It was decided--and wisely decided, as the
result proved--to say nothing to Sydney until the answer was received.
Randal’s correspondent wrote back with as little delay as possible. He
had made every inquiry without success. Not a trace of the boy had been
found, or (in the opinion of the police) was likely to be found. The one
event that had happened, since the appearance of the paragraph in the
New York journal, was the confinement of James Bellbridge in an asylum,
as a madman under restraint without hope of recovery.



Chapter VI. Sydney Teaches.


Mrs. Presty had not very seriously exaggerated the truth, when she
described her much-indulged granddaughter as “a child who had never been
accustomed to wait for anything since the day when she was born.”

Governesses in general would have found it no easy matter to produce a
favorable impression on Kitty, and to exert the necessary authority in
instructing her, at the same time. Spoiled children (whatever moralists
may say to the contrary) are companionable and affectionate children,
for the most part--except when they encounter the unfortunate persons
employed to introduce them to useful knowledge. Mr. and Mrs. Linley
(guiltily conscious of having been too fond of their only child
to subject her to any sort of discipline) were not very willing
to contemplate the prospect before Miss Westerfield on her first
establishment in the schoolroom. To their surprise and relief there
proved to be no cause for anxiety after all. Without making an attempt
to assert her authority, the new governess succeeded nevertheless when
older and wiser women would have failed.

The secret of Sydney’s triumph over adverse circumstances lay hidden in
Sydney herself.

Everything in the ordinary routine of life at Mount Morven was a source
of delight and surprise to the unfortunate creature who had passed
through six years of cruelty, insult, and privation at her aunt’s
school. Look where she might, in her new sphere of action, she
saw pleasant faces and heard kind words. At meal times, wonderful
achievements in the art of cookery appeared on the table which she
had not only never tasted, but never even heard of. When she went out
walking with her pupil they were free to go where they pleased, without
restriction of time--except the time of dinner. To breathe the delicious
air, to look at the glorious scenery, were enjoyments so exquisitely
exhilarating that, by Sydney’s own confession, she became quite light
headed with pleasure. She ran races with Kitty--and nobody reproved her.
She rested, out of breath, while the stronger child was ready to run
on--and no merciless voice cried “None of your laziness; time’s up!”
 Wild flowers that she had never yet seen might be gathered, and no
offense was committed. Kitty told her the names of the flowers, and
the names of the summer insects that flashed and hummed in the hillside
breezes; and was so elated at teaching her governess that her rampant
spirits burst out in singing. “Your turn next,” the joyous child cried,
when she too was out of breath. “Sing, Sydney--sing!” Alas for Sydney!
She had not sung since those happiest days of her childhood, when her
good father had told her fairy stories, and taught her songs. They
were all forgotten now. “I can’t sing, Kitty; I can’t sing.” The pupil,
hearing this melancholy confession, became governess once more. “Say the
words, Syd; and hum the tune after me.” They laughed over the singing
lesson, until the echoes of the hills mocked them, and laughed too.
Looking into the schoolroom, one day, Mrs. Linley found that the serious
business of teaching was not neglected. The lessons went on smoothly,
without an obstacle in the way. Kitty was incapable of disappointing her
friend and playfellow, who made learning easy with a smile and a kiss.
The balance of authority was regulated to perfection in the lives of
these two simple creatures. In the schoolroom, the governess taught the
child. Out of the schoolroom, the child taught the governess. Division
of labor was a principle in perfect working order at Mount Morven--and
nobody suspected it! But, as the weeks followed each other, one more
remarkable circumstance presented itself which every person in the
household was equally quick to observe. The sad Sydney Westerfield whom
they all pitied had now become the pretty Sydney Westerfield whom they
all admired. It was not merely a change--it was a transformation. Kitty
stole the hand-glass from her mother’s room, and insisted that her
governess should take it and look at herself. “Papa says you’re as plump
as a partridge; and mamma says you’re as fresh as a rose; and Uncle
Randal wags his head, and tells them he saw it from the first. I heard
it all when they thought I was playing with my doll--and I want to know,
you best of nice girls, what you think of your own self?”

“I think, my dear, it’s time we went on with our lessons.”

“Wait a little, Syd; I have something else to say.”

“What is it?”

“It’s about papa. He goes out walking with us--doesn’t he?”

“Yes.”

“He didn’t go out walking with me--before you came here. I’ve been
thinking about it; and I’m sure papa likes you. What are you looking in
the drawer for?”

“For your lesson books, dear.”

“Yes--but I haven’t quite done yet. Papa talks a good deal to you, and
you don’t talk much to papa. Don’t you like him?”

“Oh, Kitty!”

“Then do you like him?”

“How can I help liking him? I owe all my happiness to your papa.”

“Do you like him better than mamma?”

“I should be very ungrateful, if I liked anybody better than your
mamma.”

Kitty considered a little, and shook her head. “I don’t understand
that,” she declared roundly. “What do you mean?”

Sydney cleaned the pupil’s slate, and set the pupil’s sum--and said
nothing.

Kitty placed a suspicious construction of her own on her governess’s
sudden silence. “Perhaps you don’t like my wanting to know so many
things,” she suggested. “Or perhaps you meant to puzzle me?”

Sydney sighed, and answered, “I’m puzzled myself.”




Chapter VII. Sydney Suffers.

In the autumn holiday-time friends in the south, who happened to be
visiting Scotland, were invited to stop at Mount Morven on their way to
the Highlands; and were accustomed to meet the neighbors of the Linleys
at dinner on their arrival. The time for this yearly festival had now
come round again; the guests were in the house; and Mr. and Mrs. Linley
were occupied in making their arrangements for the dinner-party. With
her unfailing consideration for every one about her, Mrs. Linley did not
forget Sydney while she was sending out her cards of invitation.
“Our table will be full at dinner,” she said to her husband; “Miss
Westerfield had better join us in the evening with Kitty.”

“I suppose so,” Linley answered with some hesitation.

“You seem to doubt about it, Herbert. Why?”

“I was only wondering--”

“Wondering about what?”

“Has Miss Westerfield got a gown, Catherine, that will do for a party?”

Linley’s wife looked at him as if she doubted the evidence of her own
senses. “Fancy a man thinking of that!” she exclaimed. “Herbert, you
astonish me.”

He laughed uneasily. “I don’t know how I came to think of it--unless it
is that she wears the same dress every day. Very neat; but (perhaps I’m
wrong) a little shabby too.”

“Upon my word, you pay Miss Westerfield a compliment which you have
never paid to me! Wear what I may, you never seem to know how _I_ am
dressed.”

“I beg your pardon, Catherine, I know that you are always dressed well.”

That little tribute restored him to his place in his wife’s estimation.
“I may tell you now,” she resumed, with her gentle smile, “that you only
remind me of what I had thought of already. My milliner is at work for
Miss Westerfield. The new dress must be your gift.”

“Are you joking?”

“I am in earnest. To-morrow is Sydney’s birthday; and here is _my_
present.” She opened a jeweler’s case, and took out a plain gold
bracelet. “Suggested by Kitty,” she added, pointing to an inlaid
miniature portrait of the child. Herbert read the inscription: _To
Sydney Westerfield with Catherine Linley’s love._ He gave the bracelet
back to his wife in silence; his manner was more serious than usual--he
kissed her hand.

The day of the dinner-party marked an epoch in Sydney’s life.

For the first time, in all her past experience, she could look in the
glass, and see herself prettily dressed, with a gold bracelet on her
arm. If we consider how men (in one way) and milliners (in another)
profit by it, vanity is surely to be reckoned, not among the vices but
among the virtues of the sex. Will any woman, who speaks the truth,
hesitate to acknowledge that her first sensations of gratified vanity
rank among the most exquisite and most enduring pleasures that she has
ever felt? Sydney locked her door, and exhibited herself to herself--in
the front view, the side view, and the back view (over the shoulder)
with eyes that sparkled and cheeks that glowed in a delicious confusion
of pride and astonishment. She practiced bowing to strangers in her new
dress; she practiced shaking hands gracefully, with her bracelet well in
view. Suddenly she stood still before the glass and became serious and
thoughtful. Kind and dear Mr. Linley was in her mind now. While she was
asking herself anxiously what he would think of her, Kitty--arrayed in
_her_ new finery, as vain and as happy as her governess--drummed with
both fists outside the door, and announced at the top of her voice that
it was time to go downstairs. Sydney’s agitation at the prospect of
meeting the ladies in the drawing-room added a charm of its own to the
flush that her exercises before the glass had left on her face. Shyly
following instead of leading her little companion into the room, she
presented such a charming appearance of youth and beauty that the ladies
paused in their talk to look at her. Some few admired Kitty’s governess
with generous interest; the greater number doubted Mrs. Linley’s
prudence in engaging a girl so very pretty and so very young. Little
by little, Sydney’s manner--simple, modest, shrinking from
observation--pleaded in her favor even with the ladies who had been
prejudiced against her at the outset. When Mrs. Linley presented her
to the guests, the most beautiful woman among them (Mrs. MacEdwin) made
room for her on the sofa, and with perfect tact and kindness set the
stranger at her ease. When the gentlemen came in from the dinner-table,
Sydney was composed enough to admire the brilliant scene, and to wonder
again, as she had wondered already, what Mr. Linley would say to her new
dress.

Mr. Linley certainly did notice her--at a distance.

He looked at her with a momentary fervor of interest and admiration
which made Sydney (so gratefully and so guiltlessly attached to him)
tremble with pleasure; he even stepped forward as if to approach her,
checked himself, and went back again among his guests. Now, in one part
of the room, and now in another, she saw him speaking to them. The one
neglected person whom he never even looked at again, was the poor girl
to whom his approval was the breath of her life. Had she ever felt so
unhappy as she felt now? No, not even at her aunt’s school!

Friendly Mrs. MacEdwin touched her arm. “My dear, you are losing your
pretty color. Are you overcome by the heat? Shall I take you into the
next room?”

Sydney expressed her sincere sense of the lady’s kindness. Her
commonplace excuse was a true excuse--she had a headache; and she asked
leave to retire to her room.

Approaching the door, she found herself face to face with Mr. Linley.
He had just been giving directions to one of the servants, and was
re-entering the drawing-room. She stopped, trembling and cold; but,
in the very intensity of her wretchedness, she found courage enough to
speak to him.

“You seem to avoid me, Mr. Linley,” she began, addressing him with
ceremonious respect, and keeping her eyes on the ground. “I hope--”
 she hesitated, and desperately looked at him--“I hope I haven’t done
anything to offend you?”

In her knowledge of him, up to that miserable evening, he constantly
spoke to her with a smile. She had never yet seen him so serious and so
inattentive as he was now. His eyes, wandering round the room, rested
on Mrs. Linley--brilliant and beautiful, and laughing gayly. Why was
he looking at his wife with plain signs of embarrassment in his face?
Sydney piteously persisted in repeating her innocent question: “I hope I
haven’t done anything to offend you?”

He seemed to be still reluctant to notice her--on the one occasion of
all others when she was looking her best! But he answered at last.

“My dear child, it is impossible that you should offend me; you have
misunderstood and mistaken me. Don’t suppose--pray don’t suppose that I
am changed or can ever be changed toward you.”

He emphasized the kind intention which those words revealed by giving
her his hand.

But the next moment he drew back. There was no disguising it, he drew
back as if he wished to get away from her. She noticed that his lips
were firmly closed and his eyebrows knitted in a frown; he looked like
a man who was forcing himself to submit to some hard necessity that he
hated or feared.

Sydney left the room in despair.

He had denied in the plainest and kindest terms that he was changed
toward her. Was that not enough? It was nothing like enough. The facts
were there to speak for themselves: he was an altered man; anxiety,
sorrow, remorse--one or the other seemed to have got possession of him.
Judging by Mrs. Linley’s gayety of manner, his wife could not possibly
have been taken into his confidence.

What did it mean? Oh, the useless, hopeless question! And yet, again and
again she asked herself: what did it mean?

In bewildered wretchedness she lingered on the way to her room, and
stopped at the end of a corridor.

On her right hand, a broad flight of old oak stairs led to the
bed-chambers on the second floor of the house. On her left hand, an
open door showed the stone steps which descended to the terrace and the
garden. The moonlight lay in all its loveliness on the flower-beds
and the grass, and tempted her to pause and admire it. A prospect of
sleepless misery was the one prospect before her that Sydney could see,
if she retired to rest. The cool night air came freshly up the vaulted
tunnel in which the steps were set; the moonlit garden offered its
solace to the girl’s sore heart. No curious women-servants appeared on
the stairs that led to the bed-chambers. No inquisitive eyes could look
at her from the windows of the ground floor--a solitude abandoned to the
curiosity of tourists. Sydney took her hat and cloak from the stand in a
recess at the side of the door, and went into the garden.



Chapter VIII.

Mrs. Presty Makes a Discovery.


The dinner-party had come to an end; the neighbors had taken their
departure; and the ladies at Mount Morven had retired for the night.

On the way to her room Mrs. Presty knocked at her daughter’s door. “I
want to speak to you, Catherine. Are you in bed?”

“No, mamma. Come in.”

Robed in a dressing-gown of delicately-mingled white and blue, and
luxuriously accommodated on the softest pillows that could be placed in
an armchair, Mrs. Linley was meditating on the events of the evening.
“This has been the most successful party we have ever given,” she
said to her mother. “And did you notice how charmingly pretty Miss
Westerfield looked in her new dress?”

“It’s about that girl I want to speak to you,” Mrs. Presty answered,
severely. “I had a higher opinion of her when she first came here than I
have now.”

Mrs. Linley pointed to an open door, communicating with a second and
smaller bed-chamber. “Not quite so loud,” she answered, “or you
might wake Kitty. What has Miss Westerfield done to forfeit your good
opinion?”

Discreet Mrs. Presty asked leave to return to the subject at a future
opportunity.

“I will merely allude now,” she said, “to a change for the worse in your
governess, which you might have noticed when she left the drawing-room
this evening. She had a word or two with Herbert at the door; and she
left him looking as black as thunder.”

Mrs. Linley laid herself back on her pillows and burst out laughing.
“Black as thunder? Poor little Sydney, what a ridiculous description of
her! I beg your pardon, mamma; don’t be offended.”

“On the contrary, my dear, I am agreeably surprised. Your poor father--a
man of remarkable judgment on most subjects--never thought much of
your intelligence. He appears to have been wrong; you have evidently
inherited some of my sense of humor. However, that is not what I wanted
to say; I am the bearer of good news. When we find it necessary to get
rid of Miss Westerfield--”

Mrs. Linley’s indignation expressed itself by a look which, for the
moment at least, reduced her mother to silence. Always equal to the
occasion, however, Mrs. Presty’s face assumed an expression of innocent
amazement, which would have produced a round of applause on the stage.
“What have I said to make you angry?” she inquired. “Surely, my dear,
you and your husband are extraordinary people.”

“Do you mean to tell me, mamma, that you have said to Herbert what you
said just now to me?”

“Certainly. I mentioned it to Herbert in the course of the evening.
He was excessively rude. He said: ‘Tell Mrs. MacEdwin to mind her own
business--and set her the example yourself.’”

Mrs. Linley returned her mother’s look of amazement, without her
mother’s eye for dramatic effect. “What has Mrs. MacEdwin to do with
it?” she asked.

“If you will only let me speak, Catherine, I shall be happy to explain
myself. You saw Mrs. MacEdwin talking to me at the party. That
good lady’s head--a feeble head, as all her friends admit--has been
completely turned by Miss Westerfield. ‘The first duty of a governess’
(this foolish woman said to me) ‘is to win the affections of her pupils.
_My_ governess has entirely failed to make the children like her. A
dreadful temper; I have given her notice to leave my service. Look at
that sweet girl and your little granddaughter! I declare I could cry
when I see how they understand each other and love each other.’ I quote
our charming friend’s nonsense, verbatim (as we used to say when we were
in Parliament in Mr. Norman’s time), for the sake of what it led to. If,
by any lucky chance, Miss Westerfield happens to be disengaged in the
future, Mrs. MacEdwin’s house is open to her--at her own time, and on
her own terms. I promised to speak to you on the subject, and I perform
my promise. Think over it; I strongly advise you to think over it.”

Even Mrs. Linley’s good nature declined to submit to this. “I shall
certainly not think over what cannot possibly happen,” she said.
“Good-night, mamma.”

“Good-night, Catherine. Your temper doesn’t seem to improve as you get
older. Perhaps the excitement of the party has been too much for
your nerves. Try to get some sleep before Herbert comes up from the
smoking-room and disturbs you.”

Mrs. Linley refused even to let this pass unanswered. “Herbert is too
considerate to disturb me, when his friends keep him up late,” she said.
“On those occasions, as you may see for yourself, he has a bed in his
dressing-room.”

Mrs. Presty passed through the dressing-room on her way out. “A very
comfortable-looking bed,” she remarked, in a tone intended to reach her
daughter’s ears. “I wonder Herbert ever leaves it.”

The way to her own bed-chamber led her by the door of Sydney’s room. She
suddenly stopped; the door was not shut. This was in itself a suspicious
circumstance.

Young or old, ladies are not in the habit of sleeping with their bedroom
doors ajar. A strict sense of duty led Mrs. Presty to listen outside.
No sound like the breathing of a person asleep was to be heard. A
strict sense of duty conducted Mrs. Presty next into the room, and even
encouraged her to approach the bed on tip-toe. The bed was empty; the
clothes had not been disturbed since it had been made in the morning!

The old lady stepped out into the corridor in a state of excitement,
which greatly improved her personal appearance. She looked almost young
again as she mentally reviewed the list of vices and crimes which a
governess might commit, who had retired before eleven o’clock, and was
not in her bedroom at twelve. On further reflection, it appeared to be
barely possible that Miss Westerfield might be preparing her pupil’s
exercises for the next day. Mrs. Presty descended to the schoolroom on
the first floor.

No. Here again there was nothing to see but an empty room.

Where was Miss Westerfield?

Was it within the limits of probability that she had been bold enough to
join the party in the smoking-room? The bare idea was absurd.

In another minute, nevertheless, Mrs. Presty was at the door, listening.
The men’s voices were loud: they were talking politics. She peeped
through the keyhole; the smokers had, beyond all doubt, been left to
themselves. If the house had not been full of guests, Mrs. Presty would
now have raised an alarm. As things were, the fear of a possible scandal
which the family might have reason to regret forced her to act with
caution. In the suggestive retirement of her own room, she arrived at a
wise and wary decision. Opening her door by a few inches, she placed
a chair behind the opening in a position which commanded a view of
Sydney’s room. Wherever the governess might be, her return to her
bed-chamber, before the servants were astir in the morning, was a chance
to be counted on. The night-lamp in the corridor was well alight; and
a venerable person, animated by a sense of duty, was a person naturally
superior to the seductions of sleep. Before taking the final precaution
of extinguishing her candle, Mrs. Presty touched up her complexion, and
resolutely turned her back on her nightcap. “This is a case in which
I must keep up my dignity,” she decided, as she took her place in the
chair.



One man in the smoking-room appeared to be thoroughly weary of talking
politics. That man was the master of the house.

Randal noticed the worn, preoccupied look in his brother’s face, and
determined to break up the meeting. The opportunity for which he
was waiting occurred in another minute. He was asked as a moderate
politician to decide between two guests, both members of Parliament, who
were fast drifting into mere contradiction of each other’s second-hand
opinions. In plain terms, they stated the matter in dispute: “Which of
our political parties deserves the confidence of the English people?”
 In plain terms, on his sides Randal answered: “The party that lowers
the taxes.” Those words acted on the discussion like water on a fire.
As members of Parliament, the two contending politicians were naturally
innocent of the slightest interest in the people or the taxes; they
received the new idea submitted to them in helpless silence. Friends
who were listening began to laugh. The oldest man present looked at his
watch. In five minutes more the lights were out and the smoking-room was
deserted.

Linley was the last to retire--fevered by the combined influences of
smoke and noise. His mind, oppressed all through the evening, was as ill
at ease as ever. Lingering, wakeful and irritable, in the corridor (just
as Sydney had lingered before him), he too stopped at the open door and
admired the peaceful beauty of the garden.

The sleepy servant, appointed to attend in the smoking room, asked if he
should close the door. Linley answered: “Go to bed, and leave it to
me.” Still lingering at the top of the steps, he too was tempted by the
refreshing coolness of the air. He took the key out of the lock; secured
the door after he had passed through it; put the key in his pocket, and
went down into the garden.



Chapter IX. Somebody Attends to the Door.


With slow steps Linley crossed the lawn; his mind gloomily absorbed
in thoughts which had never before troubled his easy nature--thoughts
heavily laden with a burden of self-reproach.

Arrived at the limits of the lawn, two paths opened before him. One
led into a quaintly pretty inclosure, cultivated on the plan of the old
gardens at Versailles, and called the French Garden. The other path
led to a grassy walk, winding its way capriciously through a thick
shrubbery. Careless in what direction he turned his steps, Linley
entered the shrubbery, because it happened to be nearest to him.

Except at certain points, where the moonlight found its way through open
spaces in the verdure, the grassy path which he was now following wound
onward in shadow. How far he had advanced he had not noticed, when he
heard a momentary rustling of leaves at some little distance in advance
of him. The faint breeze had died away; the movement among the leaves
had been no doubt produced by the creeping or the flying of some
creature of the night. Looking up, at the moment when he was disturbed
by this trifling incident, he noticed a bright patch of moonlight ahead
as he advanced to a new turn in the path.

The instant afterward he was startled by the appearance of a figure,
emerging into the moonlight from the further end of the shrubbery,
and rapidly approaching him. He was near enough to see that it was the
figure of a woman. Was it one of the female servants, hurrying back to
the house after an interview with a sweetheart? In his black evening
dress, he was, in all probability, completely hidden by the deep shadow
in which he stood. Would he be less likely to frighten the woman if
he called to her than if he allowed her to come close up to him in the
dark? He decided on calling to her.

“Who is out so late?” he asked.

A cry of alarm answered him. The figure stood still for a moment, and
then turned back as if to escape him by flight.

“Don’t be frightened,” he said. “Surely you know my voice?”

The figure stood still again. He showed himself in the moonlight, and
discovered--Sydney Westerfield.

“You!” he exclaimed.

She trembled; the words in which she answered him were words in
fragments.

“The garden was so quiet and pretty--I thought there would be no
harm--please let me go back--I’m afraid I shall be shut out--”

She tried to pass him. “My poor child!” he said, “what is there to be
frightened about? I have been tempted out by the lovely night, like you.
Take my arm. It is so close in here among the trees. If we go back to
the lawn, the air will come to you freely.”

She took his arm; he could feel her heart throbbing against it. Kindly
silent, he led her back to the open space. Some garden chairs were
placed here and there; he suggested that she should rest for a while.

“I’m afraid I shall be shut out,” she repeated. “Pray let me get back.”

He yielded at once to the wish that she expressed. “You must let me take
you back,” he explained. “They are all asleep at the house by this time.
No! no! don’t be frightened again. I have got the key of the door. The
moment I have opened it, you shall go in by yourself.”

She looked at him gratefully. “You are not offended with me now, Mr.
Linley,” she said. “You are like your kind self again.”

They ascended the steps which led to the door. Linley took the key from
his pocket. It acted perfectly in drawing back the lock; but the door,
when he pushed it, resisted him. He put his shoulder against it, and
exerted his strength, helped by his weight. The door remained immovable.

Had one of the servants--sitting up later than usual after the party,
and not aware that Mr. Linley had gone into the garden--noticed the
door, and carefully fastened the bolts on the inner side? That was
exactly what had happened.

There was nothing for it but to submit to circumstances. Linley led the
way down the steps again. “We are shut out,” he said.

Sydney listened in silent dismay. He seemed to be merely amused; he
treated their common misfortune as lightly as if it had been a joke.

“There’s nothing so very terrible in our situation,” he reminded her.
“The servants’ offices will be opened between six and seven o’clock; the
weather is perfect; and the summer-house in the French Garden has one
easy-chair in it, to my certain knowledge, in which you may rest and
sleep. I’m sure you must be tired--let me take you there.”

She drew back, and looked up at the house.

“Can’t we make them hear us?” she asked.

“Quite impossible. Besides--” He was about to remind her of the evil
construction which might be placed on their appearance together,
returning from the garden at an advanced hour of the night; but her
innocence pleaded with him to be silent. He only said, “You forget that
we all sleep at the top of our old castle. There is no knocker to the
door, and no bell that rings upstairs. Come to the summer-house. In an
hour or two more we shall see the sun rise.”

She took his arm in silence. They reached the French Garden without
another word having passed between them.

The summer-house had been designed, in harmony with the French taste of
the last century, from a classical model. It was a rough copy in wood of
The Temple of Vesta at Rome. Opening the door for his companion, Linley
paused before he followed her in. A girl brought up by a careful mother
would have understood and appreciated his hesitation; she would have
concealed any feeling of embarrassment that might have troubled her at
the moment, and would have asked him to come back and let her know
when the rising of the sun began. Neglected by her mother, worse than
neglected by her aunt, Sydney’s fearless ignorance put a question
which would have lowered the poor girl cruelly in the estimation of a
stranger. “Are you going to leave me here by myself?” she asked. “Why
don’t you come in?”

Linley thought of his visit to the school, and remembered the detestable
mistress. He excused Sydney; he felt for her. She held the door open for
him. Sure of himself, he entered the summer-house.

As a mark of respect on her part, she offered the armchair to him: it
was the one comfortable seat in the neglected place. He insisted that
she should take it; and, searching the summer-house, found a wooden
stool for himself. The small circular room received but little of the
dim outer light--they were near each other--they were silent. Sydney
burst suddenly into a nervous little laugh.

“Why do you laugh?” he asked good-humoredly.

“It seems so strange, Mr. Linley, for us to be out here.” In the moment
when she made that reply her merriment vanished; she looked out sadly,
through the open door, at the stillness of the night. “What should
I have done,” she wondered, “if I had been shut out of the house by
myself?” Her eyes rested on him timidly; there was some thought in her
which she shrank from expressing. She only said: “I wish I knew how to
be worthy of your kindness.”

Her voice warned him that she was struggling with strong emotion. In one
respect, men are all alike; they hate to see a woman in tears. Linley
treated her like a child; he smiled, and patted her on the shoulder.
“Nonsense!” he said gayly. “There is no merit in being kind to my good
little governess.”

She took that comforting hand--it was a harmless impulse that she was
unable to resist--she bent over it, and kissed it gratefully. He drew
his hand away from her as if the soft touch of her lips had been fire
that burned it. “Oh,” she cried, “have I done wrong?”

“No, my dear--no, no.”

There was an embarrassment in his manner, the inevitable result of
his fear of himself if he faltered in the resolute exercise of
self-restraint, which was perfectly incomprehensible to Sydney. He moved
his seat back a little, so as to place himself further away. Something
in that action, at that time, shocked and humiliated her. Completely
misunderstanding him, she thought he was reminding her of the distance
that separated them in social rank. Oh, the shame of it! the shame of
it! Would other governesses have taken a liberty with their master? A
fit of hysterical sobbing burst its way through her last reserves of
self-control; she started to her feet, and ran out of the summer-house.

Alarmed and distressed, he followed her instantly.

She was leaning against the pedestal of a statue in the garden, panting,
shuddering, a sight to touch the heart of a far less sensitive man than
the man who now approached her. “Sydney!” he said. “Dear little Sydney!”
 She tried to speak to him in return. Breath and strength failed her
together; she lifted her hand, vainly grasping at the broad pedestal
behind her; she would have fallen if he had not caught her in his arms.
Her head sank faintly backward on his breast. He looked at the poor
little tortured face, turned up toward him in the lovely moonlight.
Again and again he had honorably restrained himself--he was human; he
was a man--in one mad moment it was done, hotly, passionately done--he
kissed her.

For the first time in her maiden’s life, a man’s lips touched her lips.
All that had been perplexing and strange, all that had been innocently
wonderful to herself in the feeling that bound Sydney to her first
friend, was a mystery no more. Love lifted its veil, Nature revealed
its secrets, in the one supreme moment of that kiss. She threw her arms
around his neck with a low cry of delight--and returned his kiss.

“Sydney,” he whispered, “I love you.”

She heard him in rapturous silence. Her kiss had answered for her.

At that crisis in their lives, they were saved by an accident; a
poor little common accident that happens every day. The spring in the
bracelet that Sydney wore gave way as she held him to her; the bright
trinket fell on the grass at her feet. The man never noticed it. The
woman saw her pretty ornament as it dropped from her arm--saw, and
remembered Mrs. Linley’s gift.

Cold and pale--with horror of herself confessed in the action, simple as
it was--she drew back from him in dead silence.

He was astounded. In tones that trembled with agitation, he said to her:
“Are you ill?”

“Shameless and wicked,” she answered. “Not ill.” She pointed to the
bracelet on the grass. “Take it up; I am not fit to touch it. Look on
the inner side.”

He remembered the inscription: “To Sydney Westerfield, with Catherine
Linley’s love.” His head sank on his breast; he understood her at last.
“You despise me,” he said, “and I deserve it.”

“No; I despise myself. I have lived among vile people; and I am vile
like them.”

She moved a few steps away with a heavy sigh. “Kitty!” she said to
herself. “Poor little Kitty!”

He followed her. “Why are you thinking of the child,” he asked, “at such
a time as this?”

She replied without returning or looking round; distrust of herself had
inspired her with terror of Linley, from the time when the bracelet had
dropped on the grass.

“I can make but one atonement,” she said. “We must see each other no
more. I must say good-by to Kitty--I must go. Help me to submit to my
hard lot--I must go.”

He set her no example of resignation; he shrank from the prospect that
she presented to him.

“Where are you to go if you leave us?” he asked.

“Away from England! The further away from _you_ the better for both of
us. Help me with your interest; have me sent to the new world in the
west, with other emigrants. Give me something to look forward to that is
not shame and despair. Let me do something that is innocent and good--I
may find a trace of my poor lost brother. Oh, let me go! Let me go!”

Her resolution shamed him. He rose to her level, in spite of himself.

“I dare not tell you that you are wrong,” he said. “I only ask you to
wait a little till we are calmer, before you speak of the future again.”
 He pointed to the summer-house. “Go in, my poor girl. Rest, and compose
yourself, while I try to think.”

He left her, and paced up and down the formal walks in the garden. Away
from the maddening fascination of her presence, his mind grew clearer.
He resisted the temptation to think of her tenderly; he set himself to
consider what it would be well to do next.

The moonlight was seen no more. Misty and starless, the dark sky spread
its majestic obscurity over the earth. Linley looked wearily toward the
eastern heaven. The darkness daunted him; he saw in it the shadow of his
own sense of guilt. The gray glimmering of dawn, the songs of birds when
the pure light softly climbed the sky, roused and relieved him. With the
first radiant rising of the sun he returned to the summer-house.

“Do I disturb you?” he asked, waiting at the door.

“No.”

“Will you come out and speak to me?”

She appeared at the door, waiting to hear what he had to say to her.

“I must ask you to submit to a sacrifice of your own feelings,” he
began. “When I kept away from you in the drawing room, last night--when
my strange conduct made you fear that you had offended me--I was trying
to remember what I owed to my good wife. I have been thinking of her
again. We must spare her a discovery too terrible to be endured, while
her attention is claimed by the guests who are now in the house. In a
week’s time they will leave us. Will you consent to keep up appearances?
Will you live with us as usual, until we are left by ourselves?”

“It shall be done, Mr. Linley. I only ask one favor of you. My worst
enemy is my own miserable wicked heart. Oh, don’t you understand me? I
am ashamed to look at you!”

He had only to examine his own heart, and to know what she meant. “Say
no more,” he answered sadly. “We will keep as much away from each other
as we can.”

She shuddered at that open recognition of the guilty love which united
them, in spite of their horror of it, and took refuge from him in the
summer-house. Not a word more passed between them until the unbarring of
doors was heard in the stillness of the morning, and the smoke began to
rise from the kitchen chimney. Then he returned, and spoke to her.

“You can get back to the house,” he said. “Go up by the front stairs,
and you will not meet the servants at this early hour. If they do see
you, you have your cloak on; they will think you have been in the garden
earlier than usual. As you pass the upper door, draw back the bolts
quietly, and I can let myself in.”

She bent her head in silence. He looked after her as she hastened away
from him over the lawn; conscious of admiring her, conscious of more
than he dared realize to himself. When she disappeared, he turned back
to wait where she had been waiting. With his sense of the duty he owed
to his wife penitently present to his mind, the memory of that fatal
kiss still left its vivid impression on him. “What a scoundrel I am!”
 he said to himself as he stood alone in the summer-house, looking at the
chair which she had just left.



Chapter X. Kitty Mentions Her Birthday.


A clever old lady, possessed of the inestimable advantages of worldly
experience, must submit nevertheless to the laws of Nature. Time and
Sleep together--powerful agents in the small hours of the morning--had
got the better of Mrs. Presty’s resolution to keep awake. Free from
discovery, Sydney ascended the stairs. Free from discovery, Sydney
entered her own room.

Half-an-hour later, Linley opened the door of his dressing-room. His
wife was still sleeping. His mother-in-law woke two hours later; looked
at her watch; and discovered that she had lost her opportunity. Other
old women, under similar circumstances, might have felt discouraged.
This old woman believed in her own suspicions more devoutly than ever.
When the breakfast-bell rang, Sydney found Mrs. Presty in the corridor,
waiting to say good morning.

“I wonder what you were doing last night, when you ought to have been in
bed?” the old lady began, with a treacherous amiability of manner. “Oh,
I am not mistaken! your door was open, my dear, and I looked in.”

“Why did you look in, Mrs. Presty?”

“My young friend, I was naturally anxious about you. I am anxious still.
Were you in the house? or out of the house?”

“I was walking in the garden,” Sydney replied.

“Admiring the moonlight?”

“Yes; admiring the moonlight.”

“Alone, of course?” Sydney’s friend suggested.

And Sydney took refuge in prevarication. “Why should you doubt it?” she
said.

Mrs. Presty wasted no more time in asking questions. She was pleasantly
reminded of the words of worldly wisdom which she had addressed to
her daughter on the day of Sydney’s arrival at Mount Morven. “The good
qualities of that unfortunate young creature” (she had said) “can _not_
have always resisted the horrid temptations and contaminations about
her. Hundreds of times she must have lied through ungovernable fear.”
 Elevated a little higher than ever in her own estimation, Mrs.
Presty took Sydney’s arm, and led her down to breakfast with
motherly familiarity. Linley met them at the foot of the stairs. His
mother-in-law first stole a look at Sydney, and then shook hands with
him cordially. “My dear Herbert, how pale you are! That horrid smoking.
You look as if you had been up all night.”



Mrs. Linley paid her customary visit to the schoolroom that morning.

The necessary attention to her guests had left little leisure for the
exercise of observation at the breakfast-table; the one circumstance
which had forced itself on her notice had been the boisterous gayety of
her husband. Too essentially honest to practice deception of any kind
cleverly, Linley had overacted the part of a man whose mind was entirely
at ease. The most unsuspicious woman living, his wife was simply amused
“How he does enjoy society!” she thought. “Herbert will be a young man
to the end of his life.”

In the best possible spirits--still animated by her successful exertions
to entertain her friends--Mrs. Linley opened the schoolroom door
briskly. “How are the lessons getting on?” she began--and checked
herself with a start, “Kitty!” she exclaimed, “Crying?”

The child ran to her mother with tears in her eyes. “Look at Syd! She
sulks; she cries; she won’t talk to me--send for the doctor.”

“You tiresome child, I don’t want the doctor. I’m not ill.”

“There, mamma!” cried Kitty. “She never scolded me before to-day.”

In other words, here was a complete reversal of the usual order of
things in the schoolroom. Patient Sydney was out of temper; gentle
Sydney spoke bitterly to the little friend whom she loved. Mrs. Linley
drew a chair to the governess’s side, and took her hand. The strangely
altered girl tore her hand away and burst into a violent fit of crying.
Puzzled and frightened, Kitty (to the best of a child’s ability)
followed her example. Mrs. Linley took her daughter on her knee, and
gave Sydney’s outbreak of agitation time to subside. There were no
feverish appearances in her face, there was no feverish heat in her skin
when their hands had touched each other for a moment. In all probability
the mischief was nervous mischief, and the outburst of weeping was an
hysterical effort at relief.

“I am afraid, my dear, you have had a bad night,” Mrs. Linley said.

“Bad? Worse than bad!”

Sydney stopped; looked at her good mistress and friend in terror;
and made a confused effort to explain away what she had just said. As
sensibly and kindly self-possessed as ever, Mrs. Linley told her that
she only wanted rest and quiet. “Let me take you to my room,” she
proposed. “We will have the sofa moved into the balcony, and you will
soon go to sleep in the delicious warm air. You may put away your books,
Kitty; this is a holiday. Come with me, and be petted and spoiled by the
ladies in the morning-room.”

Neither the governess nor the pupil was worthy of the sympathy
so frankly offered to them. Still strangely confused, Sydney made
commonplace apologies and asked leave to go out and walk in the park.
Hearing this, Kitty declared that where her governess went she would go
too. Mrs. Linley smoothed her daughter’s pretty auburn hair, and said,
playfully: “I think I ought to be jealous.” To her surprise, Sydney
looked up as if the words had been addressed to herself “You mustn’t be
fonder, my dear, of your governess,” Mrs. Linley went on, “than you are
of your mother.” She kissed the child, and, rising to go, discovered
that Sydney had moved to another part of the room. She was standing
at the piano, with a page of music in her hand. The page was upside
down--and she had placed herself in a position which concealed her face.
Slow as Mrs. Linley was to doubt any person (more especially a person
who interested her), she left the room with a vague fear of something
wrong, and with a conviction that she would do well to consult her
husband.

Hearing the door close, Sydney looked round. She and Kitty were alone
again; and Kitty was putting away her books without showing any pleasure
at the prospect of a holiday.

Sydney took the child fondly in her arms. “Would you be very sorry,”
 she asked, “if I was obliged to go away, some day, and leave you?”
 Kitty turned pale with terror at the dreadful prospect which those words
presented. “There! there! I am only joking,” Sydney said, shocked at
the effect which her attempt to suggest the impending separation had
produced. “You shall come with me, darling; we will walk in the park
together.”

Kitty’s face brightened directly. She proposed extending their walk
to the paddock, and feeding the cows. Sydney readily consented. Any
amusement was welcome to her which diverted the child’s attention from
herself.

They had been nearly an hour in the park, and were returning to the
house through a clump of trees, when Sydney’s companion, running on
before her, cried: “Here’s papa!” Her first impulse was to draw back
behind a tree, in the hope of escaping notice. Linley sent Kitty away to
gather a nosegay of daisies, and joined Sydney under the trees.

“I have been looking for you everywhere,” he said. “My wife--”

Sydney interrupted him. “Discovered!” she exclaimed.

“There is nothing that need alarm you,” he replied. “Catherine is too
good and too true herself to suspect others easily. She sees a change in
you that she doesn’t understand--she asks if I have noticed it--and that
is all. But her mother has the cunning of the devil. There is a serious
reason for controlling yourself.”

He spoke so earnestly that he startled her. “Are you angry with me?” she
asked.

“Angry! Does the man live who could be angry with you?”

“It might be better for both of us if you _were_ angry with me. I have
to control myself; I will try again. Oh, if you only knew what I suffer
when Mrs. Linley is kind to me!”

He persisted in trying to rouse her to a sense of the danger that
threatened them, while the visitors remained in the house. “In a few
days, Sydney, there will be no more need for the deceit that is now
forced on us. Till that time comes, remember--Mrs. Presty suspects us.”

Kitty ran back to them with her hands full of daisies before they could
say more.

“There is your nosegay, papa. No; I don’t want you to thank me--I want
to know what present you are going to give me.” Her father’s mind was
preoccupied; he looked at her absently. The child’s sense of her own
importance was wounded: she appealed to her governess. “Would you
believe it?” she asked. “Papa has forgotten that next Tuesday is my
birthday!”

“Very well, Kitty; I must pay the penalty of forgetting. What present
would you like to have?”

“I want a doll’s perambulator.”

“Ha! In my time we were satisfied with a doll.”

They all three looked round. Another person had suddenly joined in the
talk. There was no mistaking the person’s voice: Mrs. Presty appeared
among the trees, taking a walk in the park. Had she heard what Linley
and the governess had said to each other while Kitty was gathering
daisies?

“Quite a domestic scene!” the sly old lady remarked. “Papa, looking like
a saint in a picture, with flowers in his hand. Papa’s spoiled child
always wanting something, and always getting it. And papa’s governess,
so sweetly fresh and pretty that I should certainly fall in love with
her, if I had the advantage of being a man. You have no doubt remarked
Herbert--I think I hear the bell; shall we go to lunch?--you have no
doubt, I say, remarked what curiously opposite styles Catherine and Miss
Westerfield present; so charming, and yet such complete contrasts. I
wonder whether they occasionally envy each other’s good looks? Does my
daughter ever regret that she is not Miss Westerfield? And do you, my
dear, some times wish you were Mrs. Linley?”

“While we are about it, let me put a third question,” Linley interposed.
“Are you ever aware of it yourself, Mrs. Presty, when you are talking
nonsense?”

He was angry, and he showed it in that feeble reply. Sydney felt the
implied insult offered to her in another way. It roused her to the
exercise of self-control as nothing had roused her yet. She ignored Mrs.
Presty’s irony with a composure worthy of Mrs. Presty herself. “Where is
the woman,” she said, “who would _not_ wish to be as beautiful as Mrs.
Linley--and as good?”

“Thank you, my dear, for a compliment to my daughter: a sincere
compliment, no doubt. It comes in very neatly and nicely,” Mrs. Presty
acknowledged, “after my son-in-law’s little outbreak of temper. My
poor Herbert, when will you understand that I mean no harm? I am an
essentially humorous person; my wonderful spirits are always carrying me
away. I do assure you, Miss Westerfield, I don’t know what worry is. My
troubles--deaths in the family, and that sort of thing--seem to slip off
me in a most remarkable manner. Poor Mr. Norman used to attribute it to
my excellent digestion. My second husband would never hear of such an
explanation as that. His high ideal of women shrank from allusions to
stomachs. He used to speak so nicely (quoting some poet) of the sunshine
of my breast. Vague, perhaps,” said Mrs. Presty, modestly looking down
at the ample prospect of a personal nature which presented itself below
her throat, “but so flattering to one’s feelings. There’s the luncheon
bell again, I declare! I’ll run on before and tell them you are coming.
Some people might say they wished to be punctual. I am truth itself,
and I own I don’t like to be helped to the underside of the fish. _Au
revoir!_ Do you remember, Miss Westerfield, when I asked you to repeat
_au revoir_ as a specimen of your French? I didn’t think much of your
accent. Oh, dear me, I didn’t think much of your accent!”

Kitty looked after her affluent grandmother with eyes that stared
respectfully in ignorant admiration. She pulled her father’s coat-tail,
and addressed herself gravely to his private ear. “Oh, papa, what noble
words grandmamma has!”




Chapter XI.



Linley Asserts His Authority.


On the evening of Monday in the new week, the last of the visitors had
left Mount Morven. Mrs. Linley dropped into a chair (in, what Randal
called, “the heavenly tranquillity of the deserted drawing-room”) and
owned that the effort of entertaining her guests had completely worn her
out. “It’s too absurd, at my time of life,” she said with a faint smile;
“but I am really and truly so tired that I must go to bed before dark,
as if I was a child again.”

Mrs. Presty--maliciously observant of the governess, sitting silent and
apart in a corner--approached her daughter in a hurry; to all appearance
with a special object in view. Linley was at no loss to guess what that
object might be. “Will you do me a favor, Catherine?” Mrs. Presty began.
“I wish to say a word to you in your own room.”

“Oh, mamma, have some mercy on me, and put it off till to-morrow!”

Mrs. Presty reluctantly consented to this proposal, on one condition.
“It is understood,” she stipulated “that I am to see you the first thing
in the morning?”

Mrs. Linley was ready to accept that condition, or any condition, which
promised her a night of uninterrupted repose. She crossed the room to
her husband, and took his arm. “In my state of fatigue, Herbert, I shall
never get up our steep stairs, unless you help me.”

As they ascended the stairs together, Linley found that his wife had a
reason of her own for leaving the drawing-room.

“I am quite weary enough to go to bed,” she explained. “But I wanted
to speak to you first. It’s about Miss Westerfield. (No, no, we needn’t
stop on the landing.) Do you know, I think I have found out what has
altered our little governess so strangely--I seem to startle you?”

“No.”

“I am only astonished,” Mrs. Linley resumed, “at my own stupidity in
not having discovered it before. We must be kinder than ever to the poor
girl now; can’t you guess why? My dear, how dull you are! Must I remind
you that we have had two single men among our visitors? One of them is
old and doesn’t matter. But the other--I mean Sir George, of course--is
young, handsome, and agreeable. I am so sorry for Sydney Westerfield.
It’s plain to me that she is hopelessly in love with a man who has run
through his fortune, and must marry money if he marries at all. I shall
speak to Sydney to-morrow; and I hope and trust I shall succeed in
winning her confidence. Thank Heaven, here we are at my door at last! I
can’t say more now; I’m ready to drop. Good-night, dear; you look tired,
too. It’s a nice thing to have friends, I know; but, oh, what a relief
it is sometimes to get rid of them!”

She kissed him, and let him go.

Left by himself, to compare his wife’s innocent mistake with the
terrible enlightenment that awaited her, Linley’s courage failed him. He
leaned on the quaintly-carved rail that protected the outer side of
the landing, and looked down at the stone hall far below. If the old
woodwork (he thought) would only give way under his weight, there would
be an escape from the coming catastrophe, found in an instant.

A timely remembrance of Sydney recalled him to himself. For her sake, he
was bound to prevent Mrs. Presty’s contemplated interview with his wife
on the next morning.

Descending the stairs, he met his brother in the corridor on the first
floor.

“The very man I want to see,” Randal said. “Tell me, Herbert, what is
the matter with that curious old woman?”

“Do you mean Mrs. Presty?”

“Yes. She has just been telling me that our friend Mrs. MacEdwin has
taken a fancy to Miss Westerfield, and would be only too glad to deprive
us of our pretty governess.”

“Did Mrs. Presty say that in Miss Westerfield’s presence?”

“No. Soon after you and Catherine left the room, Miss Westerfield left
it too. I daresay I am wrong, for I haven’t had time to think of it; but
Mrs. Presty’s manner suggested to me that she would be glad to see the
poor girl sent out of the house.”

“I am going to speak to her, Randal, on that very subject. Is she still
in the drawing-room?”

“Yes.”

“Did she say anything more to you?”

“I didn’t give her the chance; I don’t like Mrs. Presty. You look worn
and worried, Herbert. Is there anything wrong?”

“If there is, my dear fellow, you will hear of it tomorrow.”

So they parted.

Comfortably established in the drawing-room, Mrs. Presty had just opened
her favorite newspaper. Her only companion was Linley’s black poodle,
resting at her feet. On the opening of the door, the dog rose--advanced
to caress his master--and looked up in Linley’s face. If Mrs. Presty’s
attention had happened to be turned that way, she might have seen, in
the faithful creature’s sudden and silent retreat, a warning of her
son-in-law’s humor at that moment. But she was, or assumed to be,
interested in her reading; and she deliberately overlooked Linley’s
appearance. After waiting a little to attract her attention, he quietly
took the newspaper out of her hand.

“What does this mean?” Mrs. Presty asked.

“It means, ma’am, that I have something to say to you.”

“Apparently, something that can’t be said with common civility? Be as
rude as you please; I am well used to it.”

Linley wisely took no notice of this.

“Since you have lived at Mount Morven,” he proceeded, “I think you have
found me, on the whole, an easy man to get on with. At the same time,
when I do make up my mind to be master in my own house, I _am_ master.”

Mrs. Presty crossed her hands placidly on her lap, and asked: “Master of
what?”

“Master of your suspicions of Miss Westerfield. You are free, of course,
to think of her and of me as you please. What I forbid is the expression
of your thoughts--either by way of hints to my brother, or officious
communications with my wife. Don’t suppose that I am afraid of the
truth. Mrs. Linley shall know more than you think for, and shall know it
to-morrow; not from you, but from me.”

Mrs. Presty shook her head compassionately. “My good sir, surely you
know me too well to think that I am to be disposed of in that easy
way? Must I remind you that your wife’s mother has ‘the cunning of the
devil’?”

Linley recognized his own words. “So you were listening among the
trees!” he said.

“Yes; I was listening; and I have only to regret that I didn’t hear
more. Let us return to our subject. I don’t trust my daughter’s
interests--my much-injured daughter’s interests--in your hands. They
are not clean hands, Mr. Linley. I have a duty to do; and I shall do it
to-morrow.”

“No, Mrs. Presty, you won’t do it to-morrow.”

“Who will prevent me?”

“I shall prevent you.”

“In what way, if you please?”

“I don’t think it necessary to answer that question. My servants will
have their instructions; and I shall see myself that my orders are
obeyed.”

“Thank you. I begin to understand; I am to be turned out of the house.
Very well. We shall see what my daughter says.”

“You know as well as I do, Mrs. Presty, that if your daughter is forced
to choose between us she will decide for her husband. You have the night
before you for consideration. I have no more to say.”

Among Mrs. Presty’s merits, it is only just to reckon a capacity for
making up her mind rapidly, under stress of circumstances. Before Linley
had opened the door, on his way out, he was called back.

“I am shocked to trouble you again,” Mrs. Presty said, “but I don’t
propose to interfere with my night’s rest by thinking about _you_.
My position is perfectly clear to me, without wasting time in
consideration. When a man so completely forgets what is due to the
weaker sex as to threaten a woman, the woman has no alternative but to
submit. You are aware that I had arranged to see my daughter to-morrow
morning. I yield to brute force, sir. Tell your wife that I shall not
keep my appointment. Are you satisfied?”

“Quite satisfied,” Linley said--and left the room.

His mother-in-law looked after him with a familiar expression of
opinion, and a smile of supreme contempt.

“You fool!”

Only two words; and yet there seemed to be some hidden meaning in
them--relating perhaps to what might happen on the next day--which
gently tickled Mrs. Presty in the region assigned by phrenologists to
the sense of self-esteem.




Chapter XII. Two of Them Sleep Badly.

Waiting for Sydney to come into the bedroom as usual and wish her
good-night, Kitty was astonished by the appearance of her grandmother,
entering on tiptoe from the corridor, with a small paper parcel in her
hand.

“Whisper!” said Mrs. Presty, pointing to the open door of communication
with Mrs. Linley’s room. “This is your birthday present. You mustn’t
look at it till you wake to-morrow morning.” She pushed the parcel under
the pillow--and, instead of saying good-night, took a chair and sat
down.

“May I show my present,” Kitty asked, “when I go to mamma in the
morning?”

The present hidden under the paper wrapper was a sixpenny picture-book.
Kitty’s grandmother disapproved of spending money lavishly on birthday
gifts to children. “Show it, of course; and take the greatest care of
it,” Mrs. Presty answered gravely. “But tell me one thing, my dear,
wouldn’t you like to see all your presents early in the morning, like
mine?”

Still smarting under the recollection of her interview with her
son-in-law, Mrs. Presty had certain ends to gain in putting this idea
into the child’s head. It was her special object to raise domestic
obstacles to a private interview between the husband and wife during
the earlier hours of the day. If the gifts, usually presented after the
nursery dinner, were produced on this occasion after breakfast, there
would be a period of delay before any confidential conversation could
take place between Mr. and Mrs. Linley. In this interval Mrs. Presty saw
her opportunity of setting Linley’s authority at defiance, by rousing
the first jealous suspicion in the mind of his wife.

Innocent little Kitty became her grandmother’s accomplice on the spot.
“I shall ask mamma to let me have my presents at breakfast-time,” she
announced.

“And kind mamma will say Yes,” Mrs. Presty chimed in. “We will breakfast
early, my precious child. Good-night.”

Kitty was half asleep when her governess entered the room afterward,
much later than usual. “I thought you had forgotten me,” she said,
yawning and stretching out her plump little arms.

Sydney’s heart ached when she thought of the separation that was to come
with the next day; her despair forced its way to expression in words.

“I wish I could forget you,” she answered, in reckless wretchedness.

The child was still too drowsy to hear plainly. “What did you say?” she
asked. Sydney gently lifted her in the bed, and kissed her again and
again. Kitty’s sleepy eyes opened in surprise. “How cold your hands
are!” she said; “and how often you kiss me. What is it you have come to
say to me--good-night or good-by?”

Sydney laid her down again on the pillow, gave her a last kiss, and ran
out of the room.

In the corridor she heard Linley’s voice on the lower floor. He was
asking one of the servants if Miss Westerfield was in the house or in
the garden. Her first impulse was to advance to the stairs and to answer
his question. In a moment more the remembrance of Mrs. Linley checked
her. She went back to her bed-chamber. The presents that she had
received, since her arrival at Mount Morven, were all laid out so that
they could be easily seen by any person entering the room, after she had
left the house. On the sofa lay the pretty new dress which she had worn
at the evening party. Other little gifts were arranged on either side of
it. The bracelet, resting on the pedestal of a statue close by, kept a
morsel of paper in its place--on which she had written a few penitent
words of farewell addressed to Mrs. Linley. On the toilet-table three
photographic portraits showed themselves among the brushes and combs.
She sat down, and looked first at the likenesses of Mrs. Linley and
Kitty.

Had she any right to make those dear faces her companions in the future?

She hesitated; her tears dropped on the photographs. “They’re as good as
spoiled now,” she thought; “they’re no longer fit for anybody but me.”
 She paused, and abruptly took up the third and last photograph--the
likeness of Herbert Linley.

Was it an offense, now, even to look at his portrait? No idea of leaving
it behind her was in her mind. Her resolution vibrated between two
miseries--the misery of preserving her keep-sake after she had parted
from him forever, and the misery of destroying it. Resigned to one more
sacrifice, she took the card in both hands to tear it up. It would have
been scattered in pieces on the floor, but for the chance which had
turned the portrait side of the card toward her instead of the back. Her
longing eyes stole a last look at him--a frenzy seized her--she pressed
her lips to the photograph in a passion of hopeless love. “What does it
matter?” she asked herself. “I’m nothing but the ignorant object of his
kindness--the poor fool who could see no difference between gratitude
and love. Where is the harm of having him with me when I am starving in
the streets, or dying in the workhouse?” The fervid spirit in her that
had never known a mother’s loving discipline, never thrilled to the
sympathy of a sister-friend, rose in revolt against the evil destiny
which had imbittered her life. Her eyes still rested on the photograph.
“Come to my heart, my only friend, and kill me!” As those wild words
escaped her, she thrust the card furiously into the bosom of her
dress--and threw herself on the floor. There was something in the mad
self-abandonment of that action which mocked the innocent despair of her
childhood, on the day when her mother left her at the cruel mercy of her
aunt.

That night was a night of torment in secret to another person at Mount
Morven.

Wandering, in his need of self-isolation, up and down the dreary stone
passages in the lower part of the house, Linley counted the hours,
inexorably lessening the interval between him and the ordeal of
confession to his wife. As yet, he had failed to find the opportunity of
addressing to Sydney the only words of encouragement he could allow to
pass his lips: he had asked for her earlier in the evening, and nobody
could tell him where she was. Still in ignorance of the refuge which she
might by bare possibility hope to find in Mrs. MacEdwin’s house, Sydney
was spared the torturing doubts which now beset Herbert Linley’s mind.
Would the noble woman whom they had injured allow their atonement to
plead for them, and consent to keep their miserable secret? Might they
still put their trust in that generous nature a few hours hence? Again
and again those questions confronted Linley; and again and again he
shrank from attempting to answer them.




Chapter XIII. Kitty Keeps Her Birthday.

They were all assembled as usual at the breakfast-table.

Preferring the request suggested to her by Mrs. Presty, Kitty had
hastened the presentation of the birthday gifts, by getting into her
mother’s bed in the morning, and exacting her mother’s promise before
she would consent to get out again. By her own express wish, she was
left in ignorance of what the presents would prove to be. “Hide them
from me,” said this young epicure in pleasurable sensations, “and
make me want to see them until I can bear it no longer.” The gifts had
accordingly been collected in an embrasure of one of the windows; and
the time had now arrived when Kitty could bear it no longer.

In the procession of the presents, Mrs. Linley led the way.

She had passed behind the screen which had thus far protected the hidden
treasures from discovery, and appeared again with a vision of beauty in
the shape of a doll. The dress of this wonderful creature exhibited the
latest audacities of French fashion. Her head made a bow; her eyes
went to sleep and woke again; she had a voice that said two words--more
precious than two thousand in the mouth of a mere living creature.
Kitty’s arms opened and embraced her gift with a scream of ecstasy. That
fervent pressure found its way to the right spring. The doll squeaked:
“Mamma!”--and creaked--and cried again--and said: “Papa!” Kitty sat down
on the floor; her legs would support her no longer. “I think I shall
faint,” she said quite seriously.

In the midst of the general laughter, Sydney silently placed a new toy
(a pretty little imitation of a jeweler’s casket) at Kitty’s side, and
drew back before the child could look at her. Mrs. Presty was the only
person present who noticed her pale face and the trembling of her hands
as she made the effort which preserved her composure.

The doll’s necklace, bracelets, and watch and chain, riveted Kitty’s
attention on the casket. Just as she thought of looking round for her
dear Syd, her father produced a new outburst of delight by presenting
a perambulator worthy of the doll. Her uncle followed with a parasol,
devoted to the preservation of the doll’s complexion when she went
out for an airing. Then there came a pause. Where was the generous
grandmother’s gift? Nobody remembered it; Mrs. Presty herself discovered
the inestimable sixpenny picture-book cast away and forgotten on a
distant window-seat. “I have a great mind to keep this,” she said to
Kitty, “till you are old enough to value it properly.” In the moment
of her absence at the window, Linley’s mother-in-law lost the chance
of seeing him whisper to Sydney. “Meet me in the shrubbery in half an
hour,” he said. She stepped back from him, startled by the proposal.
When Mrs. Presty was in the middle of the room again, Linley and the
governess were no longer near each other.

Having by this time recovered herself, Kitty got on her legs. “Now,” the
spoiled child declared, addressing the company present, “I’m going to
play.”

The doll was put into the perambulator, and was wheeled about the room,
while Mrs. Linley moved the chairs out of the way, and Randal attended
with the open parasol--under orders to “pretend that the sun was
shining.” Once more the sixpenny picture-book was neglected. Mrs. Presty
picked it up from the floor, determined by this time to hold it in
reserve until her ungrateful grandchild reached years of discretion. She
put it in the bookcase between Byron’s “Don Juan” and Butler’s “Lives of
the Saints.” In the position which she now occupied, Linley was visible
approaching Sydney again. “Your own interests are seriously concerned,”
 he whispered, “in something that I have to tell you.”

Incapable of hearing what passed between them, Mrs. Presty could see
that a secret understanding united her son-in-law and the governess. She
looked round cautiously at Mrs. Linley.

Kitty’s humor had changed; she was now eager to see the doll’s splendid
clothes taken off and put on again. “Come and look at it,” she said
to Sydney; “I want you to enjoy my birthday as much as I do.” Left by
himself, Randal got rid of the parasol by putting it on a table near the
door. Mrs. Presty beckoned to him to join her at the further end of the
room.

“I want you to do me a favor,” she began.

Glancing at Linley before she proceeded, Mrs. Presty took up a
newspaper, and affected to be consulting Randal’s opinion on a passage
which had attracted her attention. “Your brother is looking our way,”
 she whispered: “he mustn’t suspect that there is a secret between us.”

False pretenses of any kind invariably irritated Randal. “What do you
want me to do?” he asked sharply.

The reply only increased his perplexity.

“Observe Miss Westerfield and your brother. Look at them now.”

Randal obeyed.

“What is there to look at?” he inquired.

“Can’t you see?”

“I see they are talking to each other.”

“They are talking confidentially; talking so that Mrs. Linley can’t hear
them. Look again.”

Randal fixed his eyes on Mrs. Presty, with an expression which showed
his dislike of that lady a little too plainly. Before he could answer
what she had just said to him, his lively little niece hit on a
new idea. The sun was shining, the flowers were in their brightest
beauty--and the doll had not yet been taken into the garden! Kitty
at once led the way out; so completely preoccupied in steering the
perambulator in a straight course that she forgot her uncle and the
parasol. Only waiting to remind her husband and Sydney that they were
wasting the beautiful summer morning indoors, Mrs. Linley followed her
daughter--and innocently placed a fatal obstacle in Mrs. Presty’s way by
leaving the room. Having consulted each other by a look, Linley and the
governess went out next. Left alone with Randal, Mrs. Presty’s anger,
under the complete overthrow of her carefully-laid scheme, set restraint
at defiance.

“My daughter’s married life is a wreck,” she burst out, pointing
theatrically to the door by which Linley and Sydney Westerfield had
retired. “And Catherine has the vile creature whom your brother picked
up in London to thank for it! Now do you understand me?”

“Less than ever,” Randal answered--“unless you have taken leave of your
senses.”

Mrs. Presty recovered the command of her temper.

On that fine morning her daughter might remain in the garden until the
luncheon-bell rang. Linley had only to say that he wished to speak with
his wife; and the private interview which he had so rudely insisted on
as his sole privilege, would assuredly take place. The one chance
left of still defeating him on his own ground was to force Randal
to interfere by convincing him of his brother’s guilt. Moderation of
language and composure of manner offered the only hopeful prospect
of reaching this end. Mrs. Presty assumed the disguise of patient
submission, and used the irresistible influence of good humor and good
sense.

“I don’t complain, dear Randal, of what you have said to me,” she
replied. “My indiscretion has deserved it. I ought to have produced my
proofs, and have left it to you to draw the conclusion. Sit down, if you
please. I won’t detain you for more than a few minutes.”

Randal had not anticipated such moderation as this; he took the chair
that was nearest to Mrs. Presty. They were both now sitting with their
backs turned to the entrance from the library to the drawing-room.

“I won’t trouble you with my own impressions,” Mrs. Presty went on.
“I will be careful only to mention what I have seen and heard. If you
refuse to believe me, I refer you to the guilty persons themselves.”

She had just got to the end of those introductory words when Mrs. Linley
returned, by way of the library, to fetch the forgotten parasol.

Randal insisted on making Mrs. Presty express herself plainly. “You
speak of guilty persons,” he said. “Am I to understand that one of those
guilty persons is my brother?”

Mrs. Linley advanced a step and took the parasol from the table. Hearing
what Randal said, she paused, wondering at the strange allusion to her
husband. In the meanwhile, Mrs. Presty answered the question that had
been addressed to her.

“Yes,” she said to Randal; “I mean your brother, and your brother’s
mistress--Sydney Westerfield.”

Mrs. Linley laid the parasol back on the table, and approached them.

She never once looked at her mother; her face, white and rigid, was
turned toward Randal. To him, and to him only, she spoke.

“What does my mother’s horrible language mean?” she asked.

Mrs. Presty triumphed inwardly; chance had decided in her favor, after
all! “Don’t you see,” she said to her daughter, “that I am here to
answer for myself?”

Mrs. Linley still looked at Randal, and still spoke to him. “It is
impossible for me to insist on an explanation from my mother,” she
proceeded. “No matter what I may feel, I must remember that she _is_ my
mother. I ask you again--you who have been listening to her--what does
she mean?”

Mrs. Presty’s sense of her own importance refused to submit to being
passed over in this way.

“However insolently you may behave, Catherine, you will not succeed in
provoking me. Your mother is bound to open your eyes to the truth.
You have a rival in your husband’s affections; and that rival is your
governess. Take your own course now; I have no more to say.” With her
head high in the air--looking the picture of conscious virtue--the old
lady walked out.

At the same moment Randal seized his first opportunity of speaking.

He addressed himself gently and respectfully to his sister-in-law. She
refused to hear him. The indignation which Mrs. Presty had roused in her
made no allowances, and was blind to all sense of right.

“Don’t trouble yourself to account for your silence,” she said,
most unjustly. “You were listening to my mother without a word of
remonstrance when I came into the room. You are concerned in this vile
slander, too.”

Randal considerately refrained from provoking her by attempting to
defend himself, while she was incapable of understanding him. “You will
be sorry when you find that you have misjudged me,” he said, and sighed,
and left her.

She dropped into a chair. If there was any one distinct thought in her
at that moment, it was the thought of her husband. She was eager to see
him; she longed to say to him: “My love, I don’t believe a word of it!”
 He was not in the garden when she had returned for the parasol; and
Sydney was not in the garden. Wondering what had become of her father
and her governess, Kitty had asked the nursemaid to look for them. What
had happened since? Where had they been found? After some hesitation,
Mrs. Linley sent for the nursemaid. She felt the strongest reluctance,
when the girl appeared, to approach the very inquiries which she was
interested in making.

“Have you found Mr. Linley?” she said--with an effort.

“Yes, ma’am.”

“Where did you find him?”

“In the shrubbery.”

“Did your master say anything?”

“I slipped away, ma’am, before he saw me.”

“Why?”

“Miss Westerfield was in the shrubbery, with my master. I might have
been mistaken--” The girl paused, and looked confused.

Mrs. Linley tried to tell her to go on. The words were in her mind; but
the capacity of giving expression to them failed her. She impatiently
made a sign. The sign was understood.

“I might have been mistaken,” the maid repeated--“but I thought Miss
Westerfield was crying.”

Having replied in those terms, she seemed to be anxious to get away. The
parasol caught her eye. “Miss Kitty wants this,” she said, “and
wonders why you have not gone back to her in the garden. May I take the
parasol?”

“Take it.”

The tone of the mistress’s voice was completely changed. The servant
looked at her with vague misgivings. “Are you not well, ma’am?”

“Quite well.”

The servant withdrew.

Mrs. Linley’s chair happened to be near one of the windows, which
commanded a view of the drive leading to the main entrance of the house.
A carriage had just arrived bringing holiday travelers to visit that
part of Mount Morven which was open to strangers. She watched them
as they got out, talking and laughing, and looking about them. Still
shrinking instinctively from the first doubt of Herbert that had ever
entered her mind, she found a refuge from herself in watching the
ordinary events of the day. One by one the tourists disappeared under
the portico of the front door. The empty carriage was driven away next,
to water the horses at the village inn. Solitude was all she could see
from the windows; silence, horrible silence, surrounded her out of doors
and in. The thoughts from which she recoiled forced their way back into
her mind; the narrative of the nursemaid’s discovery became a burden
on her memory once more. She considered the circumstances. In spite of
herself, she considered the circumstances again. Her husband and Sydney
Westerfield together in the shrubbery--and Sydney crying. Had Mrs.
Presty’s abominable suspicion of them reached their ears? or?--No! that
second possibility might be estimated at its right value by any other
woman; not by Herbert Linley’s wife.

She snatched up the newspaper, and fixed her eyes on it in the hope of
fixing her mind on it next. Obstinately, desperately, she read without
knowing what she was reading. The lines of print were beginning to
mingle and grow dim, when she was startled by the sudden opening of the
door. She looked round.

Her husband entered the room.



Chapter XIV. Kitty Feels the Heartache.


Linley advanced a few steps--and stopped.

His wife, hurrying eagerly to meet him, checked herself. It might have
been distrust, or it might have been unreasoning fear--she hesitated on
the point of approaching him.

“I have something to say, Catherine, which I’m afraid will distress
you.”

His voice faltered, his eyes rested on her--then looked away again. He
said no more.

He had spoken a few commonplace words--and yet he had said enough.
She saw the truth in his eyes, heard the truth in his voice. A fit of
trembling seized her. Linley stepped forward, in the fear that she might
fall. She instantly controlled herself, and signed to him to keep back.
“Don’t touch me!” she said. “You come from Miss Westerfield!”

That reproach roused him.

“I own that I come from Miss Westerfield,” he answered. “She addresses a
request to you through me.”

“I refuse to grant it.”

“Hear it first.”

“No!”

“Hear it--in your own interest. She asks permission to leave the house,
never to return again. While she is still innocent--”

His wife eyed him with a look of unutterable contempt. He submitted to
it, but not in silence.

“A man doesn’t lie, Catherine, who makes such a confession as I am
making now. Miss Westerfield offers the one atonement in her power,
while she is still innocent of having wronged you--except in thought.”

“Is that all?” Mrs. Linley asked.

“It rests with you,” he replied, “to say if there is any other sacrifice
of herself which will be more acceptable to you.”

“Let me understand first what the sacrifice means. Does Miss Westerfield
make any conditions?”

“She has positively forbidden me to make conditions.”

“And goes out into the world, helpless and friendless?”

“Yes.”

Even under the terrible trial that wrung her, the nobility of the
woman’s nature spoke in her next words.

“Give me time to think of what you have said,” she pleaded. “I have led
a happy life; I am not used to suffer as I am suffering now.”

They were both silent. Kitty’s voice was audible on the stairs that led
to the picture-gallery, disputing with the maid. Neither her father nor
her mother heard her.

“Miss Westerfield is innocent of having wronged me, except in thought,”
 Mrs. Linley resumed. “Do you tell me that on your word of honor?”

“On my word of honor.”

So far his wife was satisfied. “My governess,” she said, “might have
deceived me--she has not deceived me. I owe it to her to remember that.
She shall go, but not helpless and not friendless.”

Her husband forgot the restraints he had imposed on himself.

“Is there another woman in the world like you!” he exclaimed.

“Many other women,” she answered, firmly. “A vulgar termagant, feeling
a sense of injury, finds relief in an outburst of jealousy and a furious
quarrel. You have always lived among ladies. Surely you ought to know
that a wife in my position, who respects herself, restrains herself. I
try to remember what I owe to others as well as what they owe to me.”

She approached the writing table, and took up a pen.

Feeling his position acutely, Linley refrained from openly admiring her
generosity. Until he had deserved to be forgiven, he had forfeited
the right to express an opinion on her conduct. She misinterpreted his
silence. As she understood it, he appreciated an act of self-sacrifice
on Miss Westerfield’s side--but he had no word of encouragement for an
act of self-sacrifice on his wife’s side. She threw down the pen, with
the first outbreak of anger that had escaped her yet.

“You have spoken for the governess,” she said to him. “I haven’t heard
yet, sir, what you have to say for yourself. Is it you who tempted her?
You know how gratefully she feels toward you--have you perverted her
gratitude, and led her blindfold to love? Cruel, cruel, cruel! Defend
yourself if you can.”

He made no reply.

“Is it not worth your while to defend yourself?” she burst out,
passionately. “Your silence is an insult!”

“My silence is a confession,” he answered, sadly. “_She_ may accept your
mercy--I may not even hope for it.”

Something in the tone of his voice reminded her of past days--the days
of perfect love and perfect confidence, when she had been the one woman
in the world to him. Dearly treasured remembrances of her married life
filled her heart with tenderness, and dimmed with tears the angry light
that had risen in her eyes. There was no pride, no anger, in his wife
when she spoke to him now.

“Oh, my husband, has she taken your love from me?”

“Judge for yourself, Catherine, if there is no proof of my love for you
in what I have resisted--and no remembrance of all that I owe to you in
what I have confessed.”

She ventured a little nearer to him. “Can I believe you?”

“Put me to the test.”

She instantly took him at his word. “When Miss Westerfield has left us,
promise not to see her again.”

“I promise.”

“And not even to write to her.”

“I promise.”

She went back to the writing-table. “My heart is easier,” she said,
simply. “I can be merciful to her now.”

After writing a few lines, she rose and handed the paper to him. He
looked up from it in surprise. “Addressed to Mrs. MacEdwin!” he said.

“Addressed,” she answered, “to the only person I know who feels a true
interest in Miss Westerfield. Have you not heard of it?”

“I remember,” he said--and read the lines that followed:

“I recommend Miss Westerfield as a teacher of young children, having
had ample proof of her capacity, industry, and good temper while she has
been governess to my child. She leaves her situation in my service
under circumstances which testify to her sense of duty and her sense of
gratitude.”

“Have I said,” she asked, “more than I could honorably and truly
say--even after what has happened?”

He could only look at her; no words could have spoken for him as his
silence spoke for him at that moment. When she took back the written
paper there was pardon in her eyes already.

The last worst trial remained to be undergone; she faced it resolutely.
“Tell Miss Westerfield that I wish to see her.”

On the point of leaving the room, Herbert was called back. “If you
happen to meet with my mother,” his wife added, “will you ask her to
come to me?”

Mrs. Presty knew her daughter’s nature; Mrs. Presty had been waiting
near at hand, in expectation of the message which she now received.

Tenderly and respectfully, Mrs. Linley addressed herself to her mother.
“When we last met, I thought you spoke rashly and cruelly. I know now
that there was truth--_some_ truth, let me say--in what offended me at
the time. If you felt strongly, it was for my sake. I wish to beg your
pardon; I was hasty, I was wrong.”

On an occasion when she had first irritated and then surprised him,
Randal Linley had said to Mrs. Presty, “You have got a heart, after
all!” Her reply to her daughter showed that view of her character to be
the right one. “Say no more, my dear,” she answered “_I_ was hasty; _I_
was wrong.”

The words had barely fallen from her lips, before Herbert returned. He
was followed by Sydney Westerfield.

The governess stopped in the middle of the room. Her head sank on her
breast; her quick convulsive breathing was the only sound that broke the
silence. Mrs. Linley advanced to the place in which Sydney stood. There
was something divine in her beauty as she looked at the shrinking girl,
and held out her hand.

Sydney fell on her knees. In silence she lifted that generous hand to
her lips. In silence, Mrs. Linley raised her--took the writing which
testified to her character from the table--and presented it. Linley
looked at his wife, looked at the governess. He waited--and still
neither the one nor the other uttered a word. It was more than he could
endure. He addressed himself to Sydney first.

“Try to thank Mrs. Linley,” he said.

She answered faintly: “I can’t speak!”

He appealed to his wife next. “Say a last kind word to her,” he pleaded.

She made an effort, a vain effort to obey him. A gesture of despair
answered for her as Sydney had answered: “I can’t speak!”

True, nobly true, to the Christian virtue that repents, to the Christian
virtue that forgives, those three persons stood together on the brink of
separation, and forced their frail humanity to suffer and submit.

In mercy to the woman, Linley summoned the courage to part them. He
turned to his wife first.

“I may say, Catherine, that she has your good wishes for happier days to
come?”

Mrs. Linley pressed his hand.

He approached Sydney, and gave his wife’s message. It was in his heart
to add something equally kind on his own part. He could only say what we
have all said--how sincerely, how sorrowfully, we all know--the common
word, “Good-by!”--the common wish, “God bless you!”

At that last moment the child ran into the room, in search of her
mother.

There was a low murmur of horror at the sight of her. That innocent
heart, they had all hoped, might have been spared the misery of the
parting scene!

She saw that Sydney had her hat and cloak on. “You’re dressed to go
out,” she said. Sydney turned away to hide her face. It was too late;
Kitty had seen the tears. “Oh, my darling, you’re not going away!” She
looked at her father and mother. “Is she going away?” They were afraid
to answer her. With all her little strength, she clasped her beloved
friend and play-fellow round the waist. “My own dear, you’re not going
to leave me!” The dumb misery in Sydney’s face struck Linley with
horror. He placed Kitty in her mother’s arms. The child’s piteous cry,
“Oh, don’t let her go! don’t let her go!” followed the governess as she
suffered her martyrdom, and went out. Linley’s heart ached; he watched
her until she was lost to view. “Gone!” he murmured to himself--“gone
forever!”

Mrs. Presty heard him, and answered him:--“She’ll come back again!”




SECOND BOOK



Chapter XV. The Doctor.


As the year advanced, the servants at Mount Morven remarked that the
weeks seemed to follow each other more slowly than usual. In the higher
regions of the house, the same impression was prevalent; but the sense
of dullness among the gentlefolks submitted to circumstances in silence.

If the question had been asked in past days: Who is the brightest and
happiest member of the family? everybody would have said: Kitty. If
the question had been asked at the present time, differences of opinion
might have suggested different answers--but the whole household would
have refrained without hesitation from mentioning the child’s name.

Since Sydney Westerfield’s departure Kitty had never held up her head.

Time quieted the child’s first vehement outbreak of distress under the
loss of the companion whom she had so dearly loved. Delicate management,
gently yet resolutely applied, held the faithful little creature
in check, when she tried to discover the cause of her governess’s
banishment from the house. She made no more complaints; she asked no
more embarrassing questions--but it was miserably plain to everybody
about her that she failed to recover her spirits. She was willing to
learn her lessons (but not under another governess) when her mother was
able to attend to her: she played with her toys, and went out riding on
her pony. But the delightful gayety of other days was gone; the shrill
laughter that once rang through the house was heard no more. Kitty had
become a quiet child; and, worse still, a child who seemed to be easily
tired.

The doctor was consulted.

He was a man skilled in the sound medical practice that learns its
lessons without books--bedside practice. His opinion declared that the
child’s vital power was seriously lowered. “Some cause is at work here,”
 he said to the mother, “which I don’t understand. Can you help me?” Mrs.
Linley helped him without hesitation. “My little daughter dearly loved
her governess; and her governess has been obliged to leave us.” That was
her reply. The doctor wanted to hear no more; he at once advised that
Kitty should be taken to the seaside, and that everything which might
remind her of the absent friend--books, presents, even articles of
clothing likely to revive old associations--should be left at home. A
new life, in new air. When pen, ink, and paper were offered to him, that
was the doctor’s prescription.

Mrs. Linley consulted her husband on the choice of the seaside place to
which the child should be removed.

The blank which Sydney’s departure left in the life of the household was
felt by the master and mistress of Mount Morven--and felt, unhappily,
without any open avowal on either side of what was passing in their
minds. In this way the governess became a forbidden subject between
them; the husband waited for the wife to set the example of approaching
it, and the wife waited for the husband. The trial of temper produced by
this state of hesitation, and by the secret doubts which it encouraged,
led insensibly to a certain estrangement--which Linley in particular was
morbidly unwilling to acknowledge. If, when the dinner-hour brought them
together, he was silent and dull in his wife’s presence, he attributed
it to anxiety on the subject of his brother--then absent on a critical
business errand in London. If he sometimes left the house the first
thing in the morning, and only returned at night, it was because the
management of the model farm had become one of his duties, in Randal’s
absence. Mrs. Linley made no attempt to dispute this view of the altered
circumstances in home-life--but she submitted with a mind ill at ease.
Secretly fearing that Linley was suffering under Miss Westerfield’s
absence, she allowed herself to hope that Kitty’s father would see a
necessity, in his own case, for change of scene, and would accompany
them to the seaside.

“Won’t you come with us, Herbert?” she suggested, when they had both
agreed on the choice of a place.

His temper was in a state of constant irritation. Without meaning it he
answered her harmless question sharply.

“How can I go away with you, when we are losing by the farm, and when
there is nobody to check the ruinous expenses but myself?”

Mrs. Linley’s thoughts naturally turned to Randal’s prolonged absence.
“What can be keeping him all this time in London?” she said.

Linley’s failing patience suffered a severe trial.

“Don’t you know,” he broke out, “that I have inherited my poor mother’s
property in England, saddled with a lawsuit? Have you never heard
of delays and disappointments, and quibbles and false pretenses,
encountered by unfortunate wretches like me who are obliged to go to
law? God only knows when Randal will be free to return, or what bad news
he may bring with him when he does come back.”

“You have many anxieties, Herbert; and I ought to have remembered them.”

That gentle answer touched him. He made the best apology in his power:
he said his nerves were out of order, and asked her to excuse him if he
had spoken roughly. There was no unfriendly feeling on either side; and
yet there was something wanting in the reconciliation. Mrs. Linley left
her husband, shaken by a conflict of feelings. At one moment she felt
angry with him; at another she felt angry with herself.

With the best intentions (as usual) Mrs. Presty made mischief,
nevertheless. Observing that her daughter was in tears, and feeling
sincerely distressed by the discovery, she was eager to administer
consolation. “Make your mind easy, my dear, if you have any doubt about
Herbert’s movements when he is away from home. I followed him myself the
day before yesterday when he went out. A long walk for an old woman--but
I can assure you that he does really go to the farm.”

Implicitly trusting her husband--and rightly trusting him--Linley’s wife
replied by a look which Mrs. Presty received in silent indignation. She
summoned her dignity and marched out of the room.

Five minutes afterward, Mrs. Linley received an intimation that her
mother was seriously offended, in the form of a little note:

“I find that my maternal interest in your welfare, and my devoted
efforts to serve you, are only rewarded with furious looks. The less
we see of each other the better. Permit me to thank you for your
invitation, and to decline accompanying you when you leave Mount Morven
tomorrow.” Mrs. Linley answered the note in person. The next day Kitty’s
grandmother--ripe for more mischief--altered her mind, and thoroughly
enjoyed her journey to the seaside.



Chapter XVI. The Child.


During the first week there was an improvement in the child’s health,
which justified the doctor’s hopeful anticipations. Mrs. Linley wrote
cheerfully to her husband; and the better nature of Mrs. Linley’s
mother seemed, by some inscrutable process, to thrive morally under the
encouraging influences of the sea air. It may be a bold thing to say,
but it is surely true that our virtues depend greatly on the state of
our health.

During the second week, the reports sent to Mount Morven were less
encouraging. The improvement in Kitty was maintained; but it made no
further progress.

The lapse of the third week brought with it depressing results. There
could be no doubt now that the child was losing ground. Bitterly
disappointed, Mrs. Linley wrote to her medical adviser, describing the
symptoms, and asking for instructions. The doctor wrote back: “Find out
where your supply of drinking water comes from. If from a well, let me
know how it is situated. Answer by telegraph.” The reply arrived: “A
well near the parish church.” The doctor’s advice ran back along the
wires: “Come home instantly.”

They returned the same day--and they returned too late.

Kitty’s first night at home was wakeful and restless; her little hands
felt feverish, and she was tormented by perpetual thirst. The good
doctor still spoke hopefully; attributing the symptoms to fatigue after
the journey. But, as the days followed each other, his medical visits
were paid at shorter intervals. The mother noticed that his pleasant
face became grave and anxious, and implored him to tell her the truth.
The truth was told in two dreadful words: “Typhoid Fever.”

A day or two later, the doctor spoke privately with Mr. Linley. The
child’s debilitated condition--that lowered state of the vital
power which he had observed when Kitty’s case was first submitted to
him--placed a terrible obstacle in the way of successful resistance to
the advance of the disease. “Say nothing to Mrs. Linley just yet. There
is no absolute danger so far, unless delirium sets in.” “Do you think it
likely?” Linley asked. The doctor shook his head, and said “God knows.”

On the next evening but one, the fatal symptom showed itself. There
was nothing violent in the delirium. Unconscious of past events in the
family life, the poor child supposed that her governess was living
in the house as usual. She piteously wondered why Sydney remained
downstairs in the schoolroom. “Oh, don’t keep her away from me! I want
Syd! I want Syd!” That was her one cry. When exhaustion silenced her,
they hoped that the sad delusion was at an end. No! As the slow fire of
the fever flamed up again, the same words were on the child’s lips, the
same fond hope was in her sinking heart.

The doctor led Mrs. Linley out of the room. “Is this the governess?” he
asked.

“Yes!”

“Is she within easy reach?”

“She is employed in the family of a friend of ours, living five miles
away from us.”

“Send for her instantly!”

Mrs. Linley looked at him with a wildly-mingled expression of hope and
fear. She was not thinking of herself--she was not even thinking, for
that one moment, of the child. What would her husband say, if she (who
had extorted his promise never to see the governess again) brought
Sydney Westerfield back to the house?

The doctor spoke to her more strongly still.

“I don’t presume to inquire into your private reasons for hesitating to
follow my advice,” he said; “but I am bound to tell you the truth. My
poor little patient is in serious danger--every hour of delay is an hour
gained by death. Bring that lady to the bedside as fast as your carriage
can fetch her, and let us see the result. If Kitty recognizes her
governess--there, I tell you plainly, is the one chance of saving the
child’s life.”

Mrs. Linley’s resolution flashed on him in her weary eyes--the eyes
which, by day and night alike, had known so little rest. She rang for
her maid. “Tell your master I want to speak to him.”

The woman answered: “My master has gone out.”

The doctor watched the mother’s face. No sign of hesitation appeared in
it--the one thought in her mind now was the thought of the child. She
called the maid back.

“Order the carriage.”

“At what time do you want it, ma’am?”

“At once!”




Chapter XVII. The Husband.


Mrs. Linley’s first impulse in ordering the carriage was to use it
herself. One look at the child reminded her that her freedom of action
began and ended at the bedside. More than an hour must elapse before
Sydney Westerfield could be brought back to Mount Morven; the bare
thought of what might happen in that interval, if she was absent, filled
the mother with horror. She wrote to Mrs. MacEdwin, and sent her maid
with the letter.

Of the result of this proceeding it was not possible to entertain a
doubt.

Sydney’s love for Kitty would hesitate at no sacrifice; and Mrs.
MacEdwin’s conduct had already answered for her. She had received
the governess with the utmost kindness, and she had generously and
delicately refrained from asking any questions. But one person at Mount
Morven thought it necessary to investigate the motives under which she
had acted. Mrs. Presty’s inquiring mind arrived at discoveries; and Mrs.
Presty’s sense of duty communicated them to her daughter.

“There can be no sort of doubt, Catherine, that our good friend and
neighbor has heard, probably from the servants, of what has happened;
and (having her husband to consider--men are so weak!) has drawn her own
conclusions. If she trusts our fascinating governess, it’s because she
knows that Miss Westerfield’s affections are left behind her in this
house. Does my explanation satisfy you?”

Mrs. Linley said: “Never let me hear it again!”

And Mrs. Presty answered: “How very ungrateful!”

The dreary interval of expectation, after the departure of the carriage,
was brightened by a domestic event.

Thinking it possible that Mrs. Presty might know why her husband had
left the house, Mrs. Linley sent to ask for information. The message
in reply informed her that Linley had received a telegram announcing
Randal’s return from London. He had gone to the railway station to meet
his brother.

Before she went downstairs to welcome Randal, Mrs. Linley paused
to consider her situation. The one alternative before her was to
acknowledge at the first opportunity that she had assumed the serious
responsibility of sending for Sydney Westerfield. For the first time in
her life, Catherine Linley found herself planning beforehand what she
would say to her husband.

A second message interrupted her, announcing that the two brothers had
just arrived. She joined them in the drawing-room.

Linley was sitting in a corner by himself. The dreadful discovery
that the child’s life (by the doctor’s confession) was in danger had
completely overwhelmed him: he had never even lifted his head when his
wife opened the door. Randal and Mrs. Presty were talking together.
The old lady’s insatiable curiosity was eager for news from London: she
wanted to know how Randal had amused himself when he was not attending
to business.

He was grieving for Kitty; and he was looking sadly at his brother.
“I don’t remember,” he answered, absently. Other women might have
discovered that they had chosen their time badly. Mrs. Presty, with the
best possible intentions, remonstrated.

“Really, Randal, you must rouse yourself. Surely you can tell us
something. Did you meet with any agreeable people, while you were away?”

“I met one person who interested me,” he said, with weary resignation.

Mrs. Presty smiled. “A woman, of course!”

“A man,” Randal answered; “a guest like myself at a club dinner.”

“Who is he?”

“Captain Bennydeck.”

“In the army?”

“No: formerly in the navy.”

“And you and he had a long talk together?”

Randal’s tones began to betray irritation. “No,” he said “the Captain
went away early.”

Mrs. Presty’s vigorous intellect discovered an improbability here. “Then
how came you to feel interested in him?” she objected.

Even Randal’s patience gave way. “I can’t account for it,” he said
sharply. “I only know I took a liking to Captain Bennydeck.” He left
Mrs. Presty and sat down by his brother. “You know I feel for you,” he
said, taking Linley’s hand. “Try to hope.”

The bitterness of the father’s despair broke out in his answer. “I
can bear other troubles, Randal, as well as most men. This affliction
revolts me. There’s something so horribly unnatural in the child being
threatened by death, while the parents (who should die first) are alive
and well--” He checked himself. “I had better say no more, I shall only
shock you.”

The misery in his face wrung the faithful heart of his wife. She forgot
the conciliatory expressions which she had prepared herself to use.
“Hope, my dear, as Randal tells you,” she said, “because there _is_
hope.”

His face flushed, his dim eyes brightened. “Has the doctor said it?” he
asked.

“Yes.”

“Why haven’t I been told of it before?”

“When I sent for you, I heard that you had gone out.”

The explanation passed by him unnoticed--perhaps even unheard. “Tell me
what the doctor said,” he insisted; “I want it exactly, word for word.”

She obeyed him to the letter.

The sinister change in his face, as the narrative proceeded was observed
by both the other persons present, as well as by his wife. She waited
for a kind word of encouragement. He only said, coldly: “What have you
done?”

Speaking coldly on her side, she answered: “I have sent the carriage to
fetch Miss Westerfield.”

There was a pause. Mrs. Presty whispered to Randal: “I knew she would
come back again! The Evil Genius of the family--that’s what I call Miss
Westerfield. The name exactly fits her!”

The idea in Randal’s mind was that the name exactly fitted Mrs. Presty.
He made no reply; his eyes rested in sympathy on his sister-in-law. She
saw, and felt, his kindness at a time when kindness was doubly precious.
Her tones trembled a little as she spoke to her silent husband.

“Don’t you approve of what I have done, Herbert?”

His nerves were shattered by grief and suspense; but he made an effort
this time to speak gently. “How can I say that,” he replied, “if the
poor child’s life depends on Miss Westerfield? I ask one favor--give me
time to leave the house before she comes here.”

Mrs. Linley looked at him in amazement.

Her mother touched her arm; Randal tried by a sign to warn her to be
careful. Their calmer minds had seen what the wife’s agitation had
prevented her from discovering. In Linley’s position, the return of the
governess was a trial to his self-control which he had every reason to
dread: his look, his voice, his manner proclaimed it to persons
capable of quietly observing him. He had struggled against his
guilty passion--at what sacrifice of his own feelings no one knew but
himself--and here was the temptation, at the very time when he was
honorably resisting it, brought back to him by his wife! Her motive did
unquestionably excuse, perhaps even sanction, what she had done; but
this was an estimate of her conduct which commended itself to others.
From his point of view--motive or no motive--he saw the old struggle
against himself in danger of being renewed; he felt the ground that he
had gained slipping from under him already.

In spite of the well-meant efforts made by her relatives to prevent it,
Mrs. Linley committed the very error which it was the most important
that she should avoid. She justified herself, instead of leaving it to
events to justify her. “Miss Westerfield comes here,” she argued, “on an
errand that is beyond reproach--an errand of mercy. Why should you leave
the house?”

“In justice to you,” Linley answered.

Mrs. Presty could restrain herself no longer. “Drop it, Catherine!” she
said in a whisper.

Catherine refused to drop it; Linley’s short and sharp reply had
irritated her. “After my experience,” she persisted, “have I no reason
to trust you?”

“It is part of your experience,” he reminded her, “that I promised not
to see Miss Westerfield again.”

“Own it at once!” she broke out, provoked beyond endurance; “though I
may be willing to trust you--you are afraid to trust yourself.”

Unlucky Mrs. Presty interfered again. “Don’t listen to her, Herbert.
Keep out of harm’s way, and you keep right.”

She patted him on the shoulder, as if she had been giving good advice to
a boy. He expressed his sense of his mother-in-law’s friendly offices in
language which astonished her.

“Hold your tongue!”

“Do you hear that?” Mrs. Presty asked, appealing indignantly to her
daughter.

Linley took his hat. “At what time do you expect Miss Westerfield to
arrive?” he said to his wife.

She looked at the clock on the mantelpiece. “Before the half-hour
strikes. Don’t be alarmed,” she added, with an air of ironical sympathy;
“you will have time to make your escape.”

He advanced to the door, and looked at her.

“One thing I beg you will remember,” he said. “Every half-hour while
I am away (I am going to the farm) you are to send and let me know how
Kitty is--and especially if Miss Westerfield justifies the experiment
which the doctor has advised us to try.”

Having given those instructions he went out.

The sofa was near Mrs. Linley. She sank on it, overpowered by the utter
destruction of the hopes that she had founded on the separation of
Herbert and the governess. Sydney Westerfield was still in possession of
her husband’s heart!

Her mother was surely the right person to say a word of comfort to her.
Randal made the suggestion--with the worst possible result. Mrs. Presty
had not forgotten that she had been told--at her age, in her position as
the widow of a Cabinet Minister--to hold her tongue. “Your brother has
insulted me,” she said to Randal. He was weak enough to attempt to make
an explanation. “I was speaking of my brother’s wife,” he said. “Your
brother’s wife has allowed me to be insulted.” Having received that
reply, Randal could only wonder. This woman went to church every Sunday,
and kept a New Testament, bound in excellent taste, on her toilet-table!
The occasion suggested reflection on the system which produces average
Christians at the present time. Nothing more was said by Mrs. Presty;
Mrs. Linley remained absorbed in her own bitter thoughts. In silence
they waited for the return of the carriage, and the appearance of the
governess.




Chapter XVIII. The Nursemaid.


Pale, worn, haggard with anxiety, Sydney Westerfield entered the room,
and looked once more on the faces which she had resigned herself never
to see again. She appeared to be hardly conscious of the kind reception
which did its best to set her at her ease.

“Am I in time?” were the first words that escaped her on entering the
room. Reassured by the answer, she turned back to the door, eager to
hurry upstairs to Kitty’s bedside.

Mrs. Linley’s gentle hand detained her.

The doctor had left certain instructions, warning the mother to guard
against any accident that might remind Kitty of the day on which Sydney
had left her. At the time of that bitter parting, the child had seen
her governess in the same walking-dress which she wore now. Mrs. Linley
removed the hat and cloak, and laid them on a chair.

“There is one other precaution which we must observe,” she said; “I
must ask you to wait in my room until I find that you may show yourself
safely. Now come with me.”

Mrs. Presty followed them, and begged earnestly for leave to wait the
result of the momentous experiment, at the door of Kitty’s bedroom. Her
self-asserting manner had vanished; she was quiet, she was even humble.
While the last chance for the child’s life was fast becoming a matter
of minutes only, the grandmother’s better nature showed itself on the
surface. Randal opened the door for them as the three went out together.
He was in that state of maddening anxiety about his poor little niece
in which men of his imaginative temperament become morbid, and say
strangely inappropriate things. In the same breath with which he
implored his sister-in-law to let him hear what had happened, without an
instant of delay, he startled Mrs. Presty by one of his familiar remarks
on the inconsistencies in her character. “You disagreeable old woman,”
 he whispered, as she passed him, “you have got a heart, after all.”

Left alone, he was never for one moment in repose, while the slow
minutes followed each other in the silent house.

He walked about the room, he listened at the door, he arranged and
disarranged the furniture. When the nursemaid descended from the upper
regions with her mistress’s message for him, he ran out to meet her; saw
the good news in her smiling face; and, for the first and last time in
his life kissed one of his brother’s female servants. Susan--a well-bred
young person, thoroughly capable in ordinary cases of saying “For shame,
sir!” and looking as if she expected to feel an arm round her waist
next--trembled with terror under that astounding salute. Her master’s
brother, a pattern of propriety up to that time, a man declared by her
to be incapable of kissing a woman unless she had a right to insist on
it in the licensed character of his wife, had evidently taken leave of
his senses. Would he bite her next? No: he only looked confused, and
said (how very extraordinary!) that he would never do it again. Susan
gave her message gravely. Here was an unintelligible man; she felt the
necessity of being careful in her choice of words.

“Miss Kitty stared at Miss Westerfield--only for a moment, sir--as
if she didn’t quite understand, and then knew her again directly. The
doctor had just called. He drew up the blind to let the light in, and
he looked, and he says: ‘Only be careful’--” Tender-hearted Susan broke
down, and began to cry. “I can’t help it, sir; we are all so fond of
Miss Kitty, and we are so happy. ‘Only be careful’ (those were the exact
words, if you please), ‘and I answer for her life.’--Oh, dear! what have
I said to make him run away from me?”

Randal had left her abruptly, and had shut himself into the
drawing-room. Susan’s experience of men had not yet informed her that a
true Englishman is ashamed to be seen (especially by his inferiors) with
the tears in his eyes.

He had barely succeeded in composing himself, when another servant
appeared--this time a man--with something to say to him.

“I don’t know whether I have done right, sir,” Malcolm began. “There’s a
stranger downstairs among the tourists who are looking at the rooms and
the pictures. He said he knew you. And he asked if you were not related
to the gentleman who allowed travelers to see his interesting old
house.”

“Well?”

“Well, sir, I said Yes. And then he wanted to know if you happened to be
here at the present time.”

Randal cut the man’s story short. “And you said Yes again, and he gave
you his card. Let me look at it.”

Malcolm produced the card, and instantly received instructions to
show the gentleman up. The name recalled the dinner at the London
club--Captain Bennydeck.




Chapter XIX. The Captain.


The fair complexion of the Captain’s youthful days had been darkened by
exposure to hard weather and extreme climates. His smooth face of twenty
years since was scored by the telltale marks of care; his dark beard was
beginning to present variety of color by means of streaks of gray; and
his hair was in course of undisguised retreat from his strong broad
forehead. Not rising above the middle height, the Captain’s spare figure
was well preserved. It revealed power and activity, severely tested
perhaps at some former time, but capable even yet of endurance under
trial. Although he looked older than his age, he was still, personally
speaking, an attractive man. In repose, his eyes were by habit sad and a
little weary in their expression. They only caught a brighter light
when he smiled. At such times, helped by this change and by his simple,
earnest manner, they recommended him to his fellow-creatures before he
opened his lips. Men and women taking shelter with him, for instance,
from the rain, found the temptation to talk with Captain Bennydeck
irresistible; and, when the weather cleared, they mostly carried away
with them the same favorable impression: “One would like to meet with
that gentleman again.”

Randal’s first words of welcome relieved the Captain of certain modest
doubts of his reception, which appeared to trouble him when he entered
the room. “I am glad to find you remember me as kindly as I remember
you.” Those were his first words when he and Randal shook hands.

“You might have felt sure of that,” Randal said.

The Captain’s modesty still doubted.

“You see, the circumstances were a little against me. We met at a
dull dinner, among wearisome worldly men, full of boastful talk
about themselves. It was all ‘I did this,’ and ‘I said that’--and the
gentlemen who were present had always been right; and the gentlemen
who were absent had always been wrong. And, oh, dear, when they came to
politics, how they bragged about what they would have done if they had
only been at the head of the Government; and how cruelly hard to please
they were in the matter of wine! Do you remember recommending me to
spend my next holiday in Scotland?”

“Perfectly. My advice was selfish--it really meant that I wanted to see
you again.”

“And you have your wish, at your brother’s house! The guide book did it.
First, I saw your family name. Then, I read on and discovered that there
were pictures at Mount Morven and that strangers were allowed to see
them. I like pictures. And here I am.”

This allusion to the house naturally reminded Randal of the master.
“I wish I could introduce you to my brother and his wife,” he said.
“Unhappily their only child is ill--”

Captain Bennydeck started to his feet. “I am ashamed of having intruded
on you,” he began. His new friend pressed him back into his chair
without ceremony. “On the contrary, you have arrived at the best of all
possible times--the time when our suspense is at an end. The doctor
has just told us that his poor little patient is out of danger. You may
imagine how happy we are.”

“And how grateful to God!” The Captain said those words in tones that
trembled--speaking to himself.

Randal was conscious of feeling a momentary embarrassment. The character
of his visitor had presented itself in a new light. Captain Bennydeck
looked at him--understood him--and returned to the subject of his
travels.

“Do you remember your holiday-time when you were a boy, and when you had
to go back to school?” he asked with a smile. “My mind is in much the
same state at leaving Scotland, and going back to my work in London. I
hardly know which I admire most--your beautiful country or the
people who inhabit it. I have had some pleasant talk with your poorer
neighbors; the one improvement I could wish for among them is a keener
sense of their religious duties.”

This was an objection new in Randal’s experience of travelers in
general.

“Our Highlanders have noble qualities,” he said. “If you knew them as
well as I do, you would find a true sense of religion among them; not
presenting itself, however, to strangers as strongly--I had almost
said as aggressively--as the devotional feeling of the Lowland Scotch.
Different races, different temperaments.”

“And all,” the Captain added, gravely and gently, “with souls to be
saved. If I sent to these poor people some copies of the New Testament,
translated into their own language, would my gift be accepted?”

Strongly interested by this time, in studying Captain Bennydeck’s
character on the side of it which was new to him, Randal owned that he
observed with surprise the interest which his friend felt in perfect
strangers. The Captain seemed to wonder why this impression should have
been produced by what he had just said.

“I only try,” he answered, “to do what good I can, wherever I go.”

“Your life must be a happy one,” Randal said.

Captain Bennydeck’s head drooped. The shadows that attend on the gloom
of melancholy remembrance showed their darkening presence on his face.
Briefly, almost sternly, he set Randal right.

“No, sir.”

“Forgive me,” the younger man pleaded, “if I have spoken thoughtlessly.”

“You have mistaken me,” the Captain explained; “and it is my fault.
My life is an atonement for the sins of my youth. I have reached my
fortieth year--and that one purpose is before me for the rest of my
days. Sufferings and dangers which but few men undergo awakened my
conscience. My last exercise of the duties of my profession associated
me with an expedition to the Polar Seas. Our ship was crushed in the
ice. Our march to the nearest regions inhabited by humanity was a
hopeless struggle of starving men, rotten with scurvy, against the
merciless forces of Nature. One by one my comrades dropped and died. Out
of twenty men there were three left with a last flicker in them of the
vital flame when the party of rescue found us. One of the three died on
the homeward journey. One lived to reach his native place, and to sink
to rest with his wife and children round his bed. The last man left,
out of that band of martyrs to a hopeless cause, lives to be worthier
of God’s mercy--and tries to make God’s creatures better and happier in
this world, and worthier of the world that is to come.”

Randal’s generous nature felt the appeal that had been made to it. “Will
you let me take your hand, Captain?” he said.

They clasped hands in silence.

Captain Bennydeck was the first to speak again. That modest distrust
of himself, which a man essentially noble and brave is generally the
readiest of men to feel, seemed to be troubling him once more--just as
it had troubled him when he first found himself in Randal’s presence.

“I hope you won’t think me vain,” he resumed; “I seldom say so much
about myself as I have said to you.”

“I only wish you would say more,” Randal rejoined. “Can’t you put off
your return to London for a day or two?”

The thing was not to be done. Duties which it was impossible to trifle
with called the Captain back. “It’s quite likely,” he said, alluding
pleasantly to the impression which he had produced in speaking of the
Highlanders, “that I shall find more strangers to interest me in the
great city.”

“Are they always strangers?” Randal asked. “Have you never met by
accident with persons whom you may once have known?”

“Never--yet. But it may happen on my return.”

“In what way?”

“In this way. I have been in search of a poor girl who has lost both her
parents: she has, I fear, been left helpless at the mercy of the world.
Her father was an old friend of mine--once an officer in the Navy like
myself. The agent whom I formerly employed (without success) to trace
her, writes me word that he has reason to believe she has obtained a
situation as pupil-teacher at a school in the suburbs of London; and
I am going back (among other things) to try if I can follow the clew
myself. Good-by, my friend. I am heartily sorry to go!”

“Life is made up of partings,” Randal answered.

“And of meetings,” the Captain wisely reminded him. “When you are in
London, you will always hear of me at the club.”

Heartily reciprocating his good wishes, Randal attended Captain
Bennydeck to the door. On the way back to the drawing-room, he found
his mind dwelling, rather to his surprise, on the Captain’s contemplated
search for the lost girl.

Was the good man likely to find her? It seemed useless enough to
inquire--and yet Randal asked himself the question. Her father had been
described as an officer in the Navy. Well, and what did that matter?
Inclined to laugh at his own idle curiosity, he was suddenly struck by
a new idea. What had his brother told him of Miss Westerfield? _She_ was
the daughter of an officer in the Navy; _she_ had been pupil-teacher at
a school. Was it really possible that Sydney Westerfield could be the
person whom Captain Bennydeck was attempting to trace? Randal threw up
the window which overlooked the drive in front of the house. Too late!
The carriage which had brought the Captain to Mount Morven was no longer
in sight.

The one other course that he could take was to mention Captain
Bennydeck’s name to Sydney, and be guided by the result.

As he approached the bell, determining to send a message upstairs,
he heard the door opened behind him. Mrs. Presty had entered the
drawing-room, with a purpose (as it seemed) in which Randal was
concerned.



Chapter XX.

The Mother-in-Law.


Strong as the impression was which Captain Bennydeck had produced on
Randal, Mrs. Presty’s first words dismissed it from his mind. She asked
him if he had any message for his brother.

Randal instantly looked at the clock. “Has Catherine not sent to the
farm, yet?” he asked in astonishment.

Mrs. Presty’s mind seemed to be absorbed in her daughter. “Ah, poor
Catherine! Worn out with anxiety and watching at Kitty’s bedside. Night
after night without any sleep; night after night tortured by suspense.
As usual, she can depend on her old mother for sympathy. I have taken
all her household duties on myself, till she is in better health.”

Randal tried again. “Mrs. Presty, am I to understand (after the plain
direction Herbert gave) that no messenger has been sent to the farm?”

Mrs. Presty held her venerable head higher than ever, when Randal
pronounced his brother’s name. “I see no necessity for being in a
hurry,” she answered stiffly, “after the brutal manner in which Herbert
has behaved to me. Put yourself in my place--and imagine what you would
feel if you were told to hold your tongue.”

Randal wasted no more time on ears that were deaf to remonstrance.
Feeling the serious necessity of interfering to some good purpose, he
asked where he might find his sister-in-law.

“I have taken Catherine into the garden,” Mrs. Presty announced. “The
doctor himself suggested--no, I may say, ordered it. He is afraid
that _she_ may fall ill next, poor soul, if she doesn’t get air and
exercise.”

In Mrs. Linley’s own interests, Randal resolved on advising her to write
to her husband by the messenger; explaining that she was not to blame
for the inexcusable delay which had already taken place. Without a word
more to Mrs. Presty, he hastened out of the room. That inveterately
distrustful woman called him back. She desired to know where he was
going, and why he was in a hurry.

“I am going to the garden,” Randal answered.

“To speak to Catherine?”

“Yes.”

“Needless trouble, my dear Randal. She will be back in a quarter of an
hour, and she will pass through this room on her way upstairs.”

Another quarter of an hour was a matter of no importance to Mrs. Presty!
Randal took his own way--the way into the garden.

His silence and his determination to join his sister-in-law roused Mrs.
Presty’s ready suspicions; she concluded that he was bent on making
mischief between her daughter and herself. The one thing to do in this
case was to follow him instantly. The active old lady trotted out of
the room, strongly inclined to think that the Evil Genius of the family
might be Randal Linley after all!

They had both taken the shortest way to the garden; that is to say, the
way through the library, which communicated at its furthest end with the
corridor and the vaulted flight of stairs leading directly out of the
house. Of the two doors in the drawing-room, one, on the left, led to
the grand staircase and the hall; the other, on the right, opened on the
backstairs, and on a side entrance to the house, used by the family when
they were pressed for time, as well as by the servants.

The drawing-room had not been empty more than a few minutes when the
door on the right was suddenly opened. Herbert Linley, entered with
hurried, uncertain steps. He took the chair that was nearest to him, and
dropped into it like a man overpowered by agitation or fatigue.

He had ridden from the farm at headlong speed, terrified by the
unexplained delay in the arrival of the messenger from home. Unable any
longer to suffer the torment of unrelieved suspense, he had returned to
make inquiry at the house. As he interpreted the otherwise inexplicable
neglect of his instructions, the last chance of saving the child’s life
had failed, and his wife had been afraid to tell him the dreadful truth.

After an interval, he rose and went into the library.

It was empty, like the drawing-room. The bell was close by him. He
lifted his hand to ring it--and drew back. As brave a man as ever lived,
he knew what fear was now. The father’s courage failed him before the
prospect of summoning a servant, and hearing, for all he knew to the
contrary, that his child was dead.

How long he stood there, alone and irresolute, he never remembered when
he thought of it in after-days. All he knew was that there came a time
when a sound in the drawing-room attracted his attention. It was nothing
more important than the opening of a door.

The sound came from that side of the room which was nearest to the grand
staircase--and therefore nearest also to the hall in one direction, and
to the bed-chambers in the other.

Some person had entered the room. Whether it was one of the family or
one of the servants, he would hear in either case what had happened
in his absence. He parted the curtains over the library entrance, and
looked through.

The person was a woman. She stood with her back turned toward the
library, lifting a cloak off a chair. As she shook the cloak out before
putting it on, she changed her position. He saw the face, never to be
forgotten by him to the last day of his life. He saw Sydney Westerfield.




Chapter XXI. The Governess.


Linley had one instant left, in which he might have drawn, back into
the library in time to escape Sydney’s notice. He was incapable of the
effort of will. Grief and suspense had deprived him of that elastic
readiness of mind which springs at once from thought to action. For a
moment he hesitated. In that moment she looked up and saw him.

With a faint cry of alarm she let the cloak drop from her hands. As
helpless as he was, as silent as he was, she stood rooted to the spot.

He tried to control himself. Hardly knowing what he said, he made
commonplace excuses, as if he had been a stranger: “I am sorry to have
startled you; I had no idea of finding you in this room.”

Sydney pointed to her cloak on the floor, and to her hat on a chair near
it. Understanding the necessity which had brought her into the room, he
did his best to reconcile her to the meeting that had followed.

“It’s a relief to me to have seen you,” he said, “before you leave us.”

A relief to him to see her! Why? How? What did that strange word mean,
addressed to _her?_ She roused herself, and put the question to him.

“It’s surely better for me,” he answered, “to hear the miserable news
from you than from a servant.”

“What miserable news?” she asked, still as perplexed as ever.

He could preserve his self-control no longer; the misery in him forced
its way outward at last. The convulsive struggles for breath which burst
from a man in tears shook him from head to foot.

“My poor little darling!” he gasped. “My only child!”

All that was embarrassing in her position passed from Sydney’s mind in
an instant. She stepped close up to him; she laid her hand gently and
fearlessly on his arm. “Oh, Mr. Linley, what dreadful mistake is this?”

His dim eyes rested on her with a piteous expression of doubt. He heard
her--and he was afraid to believe her. She was too deeply distressed,
too full of the truest pity for him, to wait and think before she spoke.
“Yes! yes!” she cried, under the impulse of the moment. “The dear child
knew me again, the moment I spoke to her. Kitty’s recovery is only a
matter of time.”

He staggered back--with a livid change in his face startling to see.
The mischief done by Mrs. Presty’s sense of injury had led already to
serious results. If the thought in Linley, at that moment, had shaped
itself into words, he would have said, “And Catherine never told me
of it!” How bitterly he thought of the woman who had left him in
suspense--how gratefully he felt toward the woman who had lightened his
heart of the heaviest burden ever laid on it!

Innocent of all suspicion of the feeling that she had aroused, Sydney
blamed her own want of discretion as the one cause of the change that
she perceived in him. “How thoughtless, how cruel of me,” she said, “not
to have been more careful in telling you the good news! Pray forgive
me.”

“You thoughtless! you cruel!” At the bare idea of her speaking in that
way of herself, his sense of what he owed to her defied all restraint.
He seized her hands and covered them with grateful kisses. “Dear Sydney!
dear, good Sydney!”

She drew back from him; not abruptly, not as if she felt offended. Her
fine perception penetrated the meaning of those harmless kisses--the
uncontrollable outburst of a sense of relief beyond the reach of
expression in words. But she changed the subject. Mrs. Linley (she told
him) had kindly ordered fresh horses to be put to the carriage, so that
she might go back to her duties if the doctor sanctioned it.

She turned away to take up her cloak. Linley stopped her. “You can’t
leave Kitty,” he said, positively.

A faint smile brightened her face for a moment. “Kitty has fallen
asleep--such a sweet, peaceful sleep! I don’t think I should have left
her but for that. The maid is watching at the bedside, and Mrs. Linley
is only away for a little while.”

“Wait a few minutes,” he pleaded; “it’s so long since we have seen each
other.”

The tone in which he spoke warned her to persist in leaving him while
her resolution remained firm. “I had arranged with Mrs. MacEdwin,” she
began, “if all went well--”

“Speak of yourself,” he interposed. “Tell me if you are happy.”

She let this pass without a reply. “The doctor sees no harm,” she went
on, “in my being away for a few hours. Mrs. MacEdwin has offered to send
me here in the evening, so that I can sleep in Kitty’s room.”

“You don’t look well, Sydney. You are pale and worn--you are not happy.”

She began to tremble. For the second time, she turned away to take up
her cloak. For the second time, he stopped her.

“Not just yet,” he said. “You don’t know how it distresses me to see
you so sadly changed. I remember the time when you were the happiest
creature living. Do you remember it, too?”

“Don’t ask me!” was all she could say.

He sighed as he looked at her. “It’s dreadful to think of your
young life, that ought to be so bright, wasting and withering among
strangers.” He said those words with increasing agitation; his eyes
rested on her eagerly with a wild look in them. She made a resolute
effort to speak to him coldly--she called him “Mr. Linley”--she bade him
good-by.

It was useless. He stood between her and the door; he disregarded what
she had said as if he had not heard it. “Hardly a day passes,” he owned
to her, “that I don’t think of you.”

“You shouldn’t tell me that!”

“How can I see you again--and not tell you?”

She burst out with a last entreaty. “For God’s sake, let us say
good-by!”

His manner became undisguisedly tender; his language changed in the
one way of all others that was most perilous to her--he appealed to her
pity: “Oh, Sydney, it’s so hard to part with you!”

“Spare me!” she cried, passionately. “You don’t know how I suffer.”

“My sweet angel, I do know it--by what I suffer myself! Do you ever feel
for me as I feel for you?”

“Oh, Herbert! Herbert!”

“Have you ever thought of me since we parted?”

She had striven against herself, and against him, till her last effort
at resistance was exhausted. In reckless despair she let the truth
escape her at last.

“When do I ever think of anything else! I am a wretch unworthy of all
the kindness that has been shown to me. I don’t deserve your interest; I
don’t even deserve your pity. Send me away--be hard on me--be brutal
to me. Have some mercy on a miserable creature whose life is one long
hopeless effort to forget you!” Her voice, her look, maddened him. He
drew her to his bosom; he held her in his arms; she struggled vainly to
get away from him. “Oh,” she murmured, “how cruel you are! Remember,
my dear one, remember how young I am, how weak I am. Oh, Herbert, I’m
dying--dying--dying!” Her voice grew fainter and fainter; her head sank
on his breast. He lifted her face to him with whispered words of love.
He kissed her again and again.


The curtains over the library entrance moved noiselessly when they were
parted. The footsteps of Catherine Linley were inaudible as she passed
through, and entered the room.

She stood still for a moment in silent horror.

Not a sound warned them when she advanced. After hesitating for a
moment, she raised her hand toward her husband, as if to tell him of her
presence by a touch; drew it back, suddenly recoiling from her own first
intention; and touched Sydney instead.

Then, and then only, they knew what had happened.

Face to face, those three persons--with every tie that had once united
them snapped asunder in an instant--looked at each other. The man owed
a duty to the lost creature whose weakness had appealed to his mercy in
vain. The man broke the silence.

“Catherine--”

With immeasurable contempt looking brightly out of her steady eyes, his
wife stopped him.

“Not a word!”

He refused to be silent. “It is I,” he said; “I only who am to blame.”

“Spare yourself the trouble of making excuses,” she answered; “they
are needless. Herbert Linley, the woman who was once your wife despises
you.”

Her eyes turned from him and rested on Sydney Westerfield.

“I have a last word to say to _you_. Look at me, if you can.”

Sydney lifted her head. She looked vacantly at the outraged woman before
her, as if she saw a woman in a dream.

With the same terrible self-possession which she had preserved from
the first--standing between her husband and her governess--Mrs. Linley
spoke.

“Miss Westerfield, you have saved my child’s life.” She paused--her
eyes still resting on the girl’s face. Deadly pale, she pointed to her
husband, and said to Sydney: “Take him!”

She passed out of the room--and left them together.




THIRD BOOK.



Chapter XXII. Retrospect.


The autumn holiday-time had come to an end; and the tourists had left
Scotland to the Scots.

In the dull season, a solitary traveler from the North arrived at the
nearest post-town to Mount Morven. A sketchbook and a color-box formed
part of his luggage, and declared him to be an artist. Falling into talk
over his dinner with the waiter at the hotel, he made inquiries about
a picturesque house in the neighborhood, which showed that Mount Morven
was well known to him by reputation. When he proposed paying a visit to
the old border fortress the next day, the waiter said: “You can’t see
the house.” When the traveler asked Why, this man of few words merely
added: “Shut up.”

The landlord made his appearance with a bottle of wine and proved to be
a more communicative person in his relations with strangers. Presented
in an abridged form, and in the English language, these (as he related
them) were the circumstances under which Mount Morven had been closed to
the public.

A complete dispersion of the family had taken place not long since. For
miles round everybody was sorry for it. Rich and poor alike felt
the same sympathy with the good lady of the house. She had been most
shamefully treated by her husband, and by a good-for-nothing girl
employed as governess. To put it plainly, the two had run away together;
one report said they had gone abroad, and another declared that
they were living in London. Mr. Linley’s conduct was perfectly
incomprehensible. He had always borne the highest character--a good
landlord, a kind father, a devoted husband. And yet, after more than
eight years of exemplary married life, he had disgraced himself. The
minister of the parish, preaching on the subject, had attributed this
extraordinary outbreak of vice on the part of an otherwise virtuous man,
to a possession of the devil. Assuming “the devil,” in this case, to be
only a discreet and clerical way of alluding from the pulpit to a woman,
the landlord was inclined to agree with the minister. After what had
happened, it was, of course, impossible that Mrs. Linley could remain
in her husband’s house. She and her little girl, and her mother, were
supposed to be living in retirement. They kept the place of their
retreat a secret from everybody but Mrs. Linley’s legal adviser, who
was instructed to forward letters. But one other member of the family
remained to be accounted for. This was Mr. Linley’s younger brother,
known at present to be traveling on the Continent. Two trustworthy old
servants had been left in charge at Mount Morven--and there was the
whole story; and that was why the house was shut up.



Chapter XXIII. Separation.


In a cottage on the banks of one of the Cumberland Lakes, two ladies
were seated at the breakfast-table. The windows of the room opened on
a garden which extended to the water’s edge, and on a boat-house and
wooden pier beyond. On the pier a little girl was fishing, under the
care of her maid. After a prevalence of rainy weather, the sun was
warm this morning for the time of year; and the broad sheet of water
alternately darkened and brightened as the moving masses of cloud now
gathered and now parted over the blue beauty of the sky.

The ladies had finished their breakfast; the elder of the two--that is
to say, Mrs. Presty--took up her knitting and eyed her silent daughter
with an expression of impatient surprise.

“Another bad night, Catherine?”

The personal attractions that distinguished Mrs. Linley were not derived
from the short-lived beauty which depends on youth and health. Pale as
she was, her face preserved its fine outline; her features had not lost
their grace and symmetry of form. Presenting the appearance of a woman
who had suffered acutely, she would have been more than ever (in the
eyes of some men) a woman to be admired and loved.

“I seldom sleep well now,” she answered, patiently.

“You don’t give yourself a chance,” Mrs. Presty remonstrated. “Here’s
a fine morning--come out for a sail on the lake. To-morrow there’s a
concert in the town--let’s take tickets. There’s a want of what I call
elastic power in your mind, Catherine--the very quality for which your
father was so remarkable; the very quality which Mr. Presty used to say
made him envy Mr. Norman. Look at your dress! Where’s the common-sense,
at your age, of wearing nothing but black? Nobody’s dead who belongs to
us, and yet you do your best to look as if you were in mourning.”

“I have no heart, mamma, to wear colors.”

Mrs. Presty considered this reply to be unworthy of notice. She went on
with her knitting, and only laid it down when the servant brought in the
letters which had arrived by the morning’s post. They were but two
in number--and both were for Mrs. Linley. In the absence of any
correspondence of her own, Mrs. Presty took possession of her daughter’s
letters.

“One addressed in the lawyer’s handwriting,” she announced; “and one
from Randal. Which shall I open for you first?”

“Randal’s letter, if you please.”

Mrs. Presty handed it across the table. “Any news is a relief from the
dullness of this place,” she said. “If there are no secrets, Catherine,
read it out.”

There were no secrets on the first page.

Randal announced his arrival in London from the Continent, and his
intention of staying there for a while. He had met with a friend
(formerly an officer holding high rank in the Navy) whom he was glad to
see again--a rich man who used his wealth admirably in the interest of
his poor and helpless fellow-creatures. A “Home,” established on a new
plan, was just now engaging all his attention: he was devoting himself
so unremittingly to the founding of this institution that his doctor
predicted injury to his health at no distant date. If it was possible to
persuade him to take a holiday, Randal might return to the Continent as
the traveling-companion of his friend.

“This must be the man whom he first met at the club,” Mrs. Presty
remarked. “Well, Catherine, I suppose there is some more of it. What’s
the matter? Bad news?”

“Something that I wish Randal had not written. Read it yourself--and
don’t talk of it afterward.”

Mrs. Presty read:

“I know nothing whatever of my unfortunate brother. If you think this is
a too-indulgent way of alluding to a man who has so shamefully wronged
you, let my conviction that he is already beginning to suffer the
penalty of his crime plead my excuse. Herbert’s nature is, in some
respects, better known to me than it is to you. I am persuaded that your
hold on his respect and his devotion is shaken--not lost. He has been
misled by one of those passing fancies, disastrous and even criminal in
their results, to which men are liable when they are led by no better
influence than the influence of their senses. It is not, and never will
be, in the nature of women to understand this. I fear I may offend you
in what I am now writing; but I must speak what I believe to be the
truth, at any sacrifice. Bitter repentance (if he is not already feeling
it) is in store for Herbert, when he finds himself tied to a person who
cannot bear comparison with you. I say this, pitying the poor girl most
sincerely, when I think of her youth and her wretched past life. How it
will end I cannot presume to say. I can only acknowledge that I do not
look to the future with the absolute despair which you naturally felt
when I last saw you.”

Mrs. Presty laid the letter down, privately resolving to write to
Randal, and tell him to keep his convictions for the future to himself.
A glance at her daughter’s face warned her, if she said anything, to
choose a new subject.

The second letter still remained unnoticed. “Shall we see what the
lawyer says?” she suggested--and opened the envelope. The lawyer had
nothing to say. He simply inclosed a letter received at his office.

Mrs. Presty had long passed the age at which emotion expresses itself
outwardly by a change of color. She turned pale, nevertheless, when she
looked at the second letter.

The address was in Herbert Linley’s handwriting.



Chapter XXIV. Hostility.


When she was not eating her meals or asleep in her bed, absolute silence
on Mrs. Presty’s part was a circumstance without precedent in the
experience of her daughter. Mrs. Presty was absolutely silent now. Mrs.
Linley looked up.

She at once perceived the change in her mother’s face and asked what
it meant. “Mamma, you look as if something had frightened you. Is it
anything in that letter?” She bent over the table, and looked a little
closer at the letter. Mrs. Presty had turned it so that the address was
underneath; and the closed envelope was visible still intact. “Why don’t
you open it?” Mrs. Linley asked.

Mrs. Presty made a strange reply. “I am thinking of throwing it into the
fire.”

“My letter?”

“Yes; your letter.”

“Let me look at it first.”

“You had better not look at it, Catherine.”

Naturally enough, Mrs. Linley remonstrated. “Surely I ought to read a
letter forwarded by my lawyer. Why are you hiding the address from me?
Is it from some person whose handwriting we both know?” She looked again
at her silent mother--reflected--and guessed the truth. “Give it to me
directly,” she said; “my husband has written to me.”

Mrs. Presty’s heavy eyebrows gathered into a frown. “Is it possible,”
 she asked sternly, “that you are still fond enough of that man to care
about what he writes to you?” Mrs. Linley held out her hand for the
letter. Her wise mother found it desirable to try persuasion next. “If
you really won’t give way, my dear, humor me for once. Will you let me
read it to you?”

“Yes--if you promise to read every word of it.”

Mrs. Presty promised (with a mental reservation), and opened the letter.

At the two first words, she stopped and began to clean her spectacles.
Had her own eyes deceived her? Or had Herbert Linley actually addressed
her daughter--after having been guilty of the cruelest wrong that a
husband can inflict on a wife--as “Dear Catherine”? Yes: there were the
words, when she put her spectacles on again. Was he in his right senses?
or had he written in a state of intoxication?

Mrs. Linley waited, with a preoccupied mind: she showed no signs of
impatience or surprise. As it presently appeared, she was not thinking
of the letter addressed to her by Herbert, but of the letter written by
Randal. “I want to look at it again.” With that brief explanation she
turned at once to the closing lines which had offended her when she
first read them.

Mrs. Presty hazarded a guess at what was going on in her daughter’s
mind. “Now your husband has written to you,” she said, “are you
beginning to think Randal’s opinion may be worth considering again?”
 With her eyes still on Randal’s letter, Mrs. Linley merely answered:
“Why don’t you begin?” Mrs. Presty began as follows, leaving out the
familiarity of her son-in-law’s address to his wife.

“I hope and trust you will forgive me for venturing to write to you,
in consideration of the subject of my letter. I have something to say
concerning our child. Although I have deserved the worst you can think
of me, I believe you will not deny that even your love for our little
Kitty (while we were living together) was not a truer love than mine.
Bad as I am, my heart has that tender place left in it still. I cannot
endure separation from my child.”

Mrs. Linley rose to her feet. The first vague anticipations of future
atonement and reconciliation, suggested by her brother-in-law, no longer
existed in her mind: she foresaw but too plainly what was to come. “Read
faster,” she said, “or let me read it for myself.”

Mrs. Presty went on: “There is no wish, on my part, to pain you by any
needless allusion to my claims as a father. My one desire is to enter
into an arrangement which shall be as just toward you, as it is toward
me. I propose that Kitty shall live with her father one half of the
year, and shall return to her mother’s care for the other half If there
is any valid objection to this, I confess I fail to see it.”

Mrs. Linley could remain silent no longer.

“Does he see no difference,” she broke out, “between his position and
mine? What consolation--in God’s name, what consolation is left to me
for the rest of my life but my child? And he threatens to separate us
for six months in every year! And he takes credit to himself for an act
of exalted justice on his part! Is there no such thing as shame in the
hearts of men?”

Under ordinary circumstances, her mother would have tried to calm her.
But Mrs. Presty had turned to the next page of the letter, at the moment
when her daughter spoke.

What she found written, on that other side, produced a startling effect
on her. She crumpled the letter up in her hand, and threw it into the
fireplace. It fell under the grate instead of into the grate. With
amazing activity for a woman of her age, she ran across the room to burn
it. Younger and quicker, Mrs. Linley got to the fireplace first, and
seized the letter. “There is something more!” she exclaimed. “And you
are afraid of my knowing what it is.”

“Don’t read it!” Mrs. Presty called out.

There was but one sentence left to read: “If your maternal anxiety
suggests any misgiving, let me add that a woman’s loving care will watch
over our little girl while she is under my roof. You will remember how
fond Miss Westerfield was of Kitty, and you will believe me when I tell
you that she is as truly devoted to the child as ever.”

“I tried to prevent you from reading it,” said Mrs. Presty.

Mrs. Linley looked at her mother with a strange unnatural smile.

“I wouldn’t have missed this for anything!” she said. “The cruelest of
all separations is proposed to me--and I am expected to submit to it,
because my husband’s mistress is fond of my child!” She threw the letter
from her with a frantic gesture of contempt and burst into a fit of
hysterical laughter.

The old mother’s instinct--not the old mother’s reason--told her what
to do. She drew her daughter to the open window, and called to Kitty to
come in. The child (still amusing herself by fishing in the lake) laid
down her rod. Mrs. Linley saw her running lightly along the little
pier, on her way to the house. _That_ influence effected what no other
influence could have achieved. The outraged wife controlled herself,
for the sake of her child. Mrs. Presty led her out to meet Kitty in
the garden; waited until she saw them together; and returned to the
breakfast-room.

Herbert Linley’s letter lay on the floor; his discreet mother-in-law
picked it up. It could do no more harm now, and there might be reasons
for keeping the husband’s proposal. “Unless I am very much mistaken,”
 Mrs. Presty concluded, “we shall hear more from the lawyer before long.”
 She locked up the letter, and wondered what her daughter would do next.

In half an hour Mrs. Linley returned--pale, silent, self-contained.

She seated herself at her desk; wrote literally one line; signed it
without an instant’s hesitation, and folded the paper. Before it was
secured in the envelope, Mrs. Presty interfered with a characteristic
request. “You are writing to Mr. Linley, of course,” she said. “May I
see it?”

Mrs. Linley handed the letter to her. The one line of writing contained
these words: “I refuse positively to part with my child.--Catherine
Linley.”

“Have you considered what is likely to happen, when he gets this?” Mrs.
Presty inquired.

“No, mamma.”

“Will you consult Randal?”

“I would rather not consult him.”

“Will you let me consult him for you?”

“Thank you--no.”

“Why not?”

“After what Randal has written to me, I don’t attach any value to his
opinion.” With that reply she sent her letter to the post, and went back
again to Kitty.

After this, Mrs. Presty resolved to wait the arrival of Herbert Linley’s
answer, and to let events take their course. The view from the window
(as she passed it, walking up and down the room) offered her little
help in forecasting the future. Kitty had returned to her fishing; and
Kitty’s mother was walking slowly up and down the pier, deep in thought.
Was she thinking of what might happen, and summoning the resolution
which so seldom showed itself on ordinary occasions?



Chapter XXV. Consultation.


No second letter arrived. But a telegram was received from the lawyer
toward the end of the week.

“Expect me to-morrow on business which requires personal consultation.”

That was the message. In taking the long journey to Cumberland, Mrs.
Linley’s legal adviser sacrificed two days of his precious time in
London. Something serious must assuredly have happened.

In the meantime, who was the lawyer?

He was Mr. Sarrazin, of Lincoln’s Inn Fields.

Was he an Englishman or a Frenchman?

He was a curious mixture of both. His ancestors had been among the
persecuted French people who found a refuge in England, when the
priest-ridden tyrant, Louis the Fourteenth, revoked the Edict of Nantes.
A British subject by birth, and a thoroughly competent and trustworthy
man, Mr. Sarrazin labored under one inveterate delusion; he firmly
believed that his original French nature had been completely eradicated,
under the influence of our insular climate and our insular customs.
No matter how often the strain of the lively French blood might assert
itself, at inconvenient times and under regrettable circumstances,
he never recognized this foreign side of his character. His excellent
spirits, his quick sympathies, his bright mutability of mind--all
those qualities, in short, which were most mischievously ready to raise
distrust in the mind of English clients, before their sentiment changed
for the better under the light of later experience--were attributed
by Mr. Sarrazin to the exhilarating influence of his happy domestic
circumstances and his successful professional career. His essentially
English wife; his essentially English children; his whiskers, his
politics, his umbrella, his pew at church, his plum pudding, his _Times_
newspaper, all answered for him (he was accustomed to say) as an inbred
member of the glorious nation that rejoices in hunting the fox, and
believes in innumerable pills.

This excellent man arrived at the cottage, desperately fatigued after
his long journey, but in perfect possession of his incomparable temper,
nevertheless.

He afforded a proof of this happy state of mind, on sitting down to his
supper. An epicure, if ever there was one yet, he found the solid part
of the refreshments offered to him to consist of a chop. The old
French blood curdled at the sight of it--but the true-born Englishman
heroically devoted himself to the national meal. At the same time the
French vivacity discovered a kindred soul in Kitty; Mr. Sarrazin became
her intimate friend in five minutes. He listened to her and talked to
her, as if the child had been his client, and fishing from the pier the
business which had brought him from London. To Mrs. Presty’s disgust,
he turned up a corner of the table-cloth, when he had finished his
chop, and began to conjure so deftly with the spoons and forks that poor
little Kitty (often dull, now, under the changed domestic circumstances
of her life) clapped her hands with pleasure, and became the joyous
child of the happy old times once more. Mrs. Linley, flattered in her
maternal love and her maternal pride, never thought of recalling this
extraordinary lawyer to the business that was waiting to be discussed.
But Mrs. Presty looked at the clock, and discovered that her grandchild
ought to have been in bed half-an-hour ago.

“Time to say good-night,” the grandmother suggested.

The grandchild failed to see the subject of bed in the same light. “Oh,
not yet,” she pleaded; “I want to speak to Mr.--” Having only heard the
visitor’s name once, and not finding her memory in good working order
after the conjuring, Kitty hesitated. “Isn’t your name something like
Saracen?” she asked.

“Very like!” cried the genial lawyer. “Try my other name, my dear. I’m
Samuel as well as Sarrazin.”

“Ah, that’ll do,” said Kitty. “Grandmamma, before I go to bed, I’ve
something to ask Samuel.”

Grandmamma persisted in deferring the question until the next morning.
Samuel administered consolation before he said good-night. “I’ll get
up early,” he whispered, “and we’ll go on the pier before breakfast and
fish.”

Kitty expressed her gratitude in her own outspoken way. “Oh, dear, how
nice it would be, Samuel, if you lived with us!” Mrs. Linley laughed for
the first time, poor soul, since the catastrophe which had broken up her
home. Mrs. Presty set a proper example. She moved her chair so that she
faced the lawyer, and said: “Now, Mr. Sarrazin!”

He acknowledged that he understood what this meant, by a very
unprofessional choice of words. “We are in a mess,” he began, “and the
sooner we are out of it the better.”

“Only let me keep Kitty,” Mrs. Linley declared, “and I’ll do whatever
you think right.”

“Stick to that, dear madam, when you have heard what I have to tell
you--and I shall not have taken my journey in vain. In the first place,
may I look at the letter which I had the honor of forwarding some days
since?”

Mrs. Presty gave him Herbert Linley’s letter. He read it with the
closest attention, and tapped the breast-pocket of his coat when he had
done.

“If I didn’t know what I have got here,” he remarked, “I should have
said: Another person dictated this letter, and the name of the person is
Miss Westerfield.”

“Just my idea!” Mrs. Presty exclaimed. “There can’t be a doubt of it.”

“Oh, but there is a very great doubt of it, ma’am; and you will say
so too when you know what your severe son-in-law threatens to do.” He
turned to Mrs. Linley. “After having seen that pretty little friend of
mine who has just gone to bed (how much nicer it would be for all of
us if we could go to bed too!), I think I know how you answered your
husband’s letter. But I ought perhaps to see how you have expressed
yourself. Have you got a copy?”

“It was too short, Mr. Sarrazin, to make a copy necessary.”

“Do you mean you can remember it?”

“I can repeat it word for word. This was my reply: I refuse, positively,
to part with my child.”

“No more like that?”

“No more.”

Mr. Sarrazin looked at his client with undisguised admiration. “The
only time in all my long experience,” he said, “in which I have found a
lady’s letter capable of expressing itself strongly in a few words. What
a lawyer you will make, Mrs. Linley, when the rights of women invade my
profession!”

He put his hand into his pocket and produced a letter addressed to
himself.

Watching him anxiously, the ladies saw his bright face become
overclouded with anxiety. “I am the wretched bearer of bad news,” he
resumed, “and if I fidget in my chair, that is the reason for it. Let us
get to the point--and let us get off it again as soon as possible. Here
is a letter, written to me by Mr. Linley’s lawyer. If you will take my
advice you will let me say what the substance of it is, and then put
it back in my pocket. I doubt if a woman has influenced these cruel
instructions, Mrs. Presty; and, therefore, I doubt if a woman influenced
the letter which led the way to them. Did I not say just now that I was
coming to the point? and here I am wandering further and further away
from it. A lawyer is human; there is the only excuse. Now, Mrs. Linley,
in two words; your husband is determined to have little Miss Kitty; and
the law, when he applies to it, is his obedient humble servant.”

“Do you mean that the law takes my child away from me?”

“I am ashamed, madam, to think that I live by the law; but that, I must
own, is exactly what it is capable of doing in the present case. Compose
yourself, I beg and pray. A time will come when women will remind men
that the mother bears the child and feeds the child, and will
insist that the mother’s right is the best right of the two. In the
meanwhile--”

“In the meanwhile, Mr. Sarrazin, I won’t submit to the law.”

“Quite right, Catherine!” cried Mrs. Presty. “Exactly what I should do,
in your place.”

Mr. Sarrazin listened patiently. “I am all attention, good ladies,” he
said, with the gentlest resignation. “Let me hear how you mean to do
it.”

The good ladies looked at each other. They discovered that it is one
thing to set an abuse at defiance in words, and another thing to
apply the remedy in deeds. The kind-hearted lawyer helped them with a
suggestion. “Perhaps you think of making your escape with the child, and
taking refuge abroad?”

Mrs. Linley eagerly accepted the hint. “The first train to-morrow
morning starts at half-past seven,” she said. “We might catch some
foreign steamer that sails from the east coast of Scotland.”

Mrs. Presty, keeping a wary eye on Mr. Sarrazin, was not quite so
ready as her daughter in rushing at conclusions. “I am afraid,” she
acknowledged, “our worthy friend sees some objection. What is it?”

“I don’t presume to offer a positive opinion, ma’am; but I think Mr.
Linley and his lawyer have their suspicions. Plainly speaking, I am
afraid spies are set to watch us already.”

“Impossible!”

“You shall hear. I travel second-class; one saves money and one finds
people to talk to--and at what sacrifice? Only a hard cushion to sit
on! In the same carriage with me there was a very conversable person--a
smart young man with flaming red hair. When we took the omnibus at your
station here, all the passengers got out in the town except two. I was
one exception, and the smart young man was the other. When I stopped
at your gate, the omnibus went on a few yards, and set down my
fellow-traveler at the village inn. My profession makes me sly. I waited
a little before I rang your bell; and, when I could do it without being
seen, I crossed the road, and had a look at the inn. There is a moon
to-night; I was very careful. The young man didn’t see me. But I saw a
head of flaming hair, and a pair of amiable blue eyes, over the blind of
a window; and it happened to be the one window of the inn which commands
a full view of your gate. Mere suspicion, you will say! I can’t deny it,
and yet I have my reasons for suspecting. Before I left London, one of
my clerks followed me in a great hurry to the terminus, and caught me
as I was opening the carriage door. ‘We have just made a discovery,’ he
said; ‘you and Mrs. Linley are to be reckoned up.’ Reckoned up is, if
you please, detective English for being watched. My clerk might have
repeated a false report, of course. And my fellow-traveler might have
come all the way from London to look out of the window of an inn, in a
Cumberland village. What do you think yourselves?”

It seemed to be easier to dispute the law than to dispute Mr. Sarrazin’s
conclusions.

“Suppose I choose to travel abroad, and to take my child with me,” Mrs.
Linley persisted, “who has any right to prevent me?”

Mr. Sarrazin reluctantly reminded her that the father had a right. “No
person--not even the mother--can take the child out of the father’s
custody,” he said, “except with the father’s consent. His authority is
the supreme authority--unless it happens that the law has deprived him
of his privilege, and has expressly confided the child to the mother’s
care. Ha!” cried Mr. Sarrazin, twisting round in his chair and fixing
his keen eyes on Mrs. Presty, “look at your good mother; _she_ sees what
I am coming to.”

“I see something more than you think,” Mrs. Presty answered. “If I know
anything of my daughter’s nature, you will find yourself, before long,
on delicate ground.”

“What do you mean, mamma?”

Mrs. Presty had lived in the past age when persons occasionally used
metaphor as an aid to the expression of their ideas. Being called
upon to explain herself, she did it in metaphor, to her own entire
satisfaction.

“Our learned friend here reminds me, my dear Catherine, of a traveler
exploring a strange town. He takes a turning, in the confident
expectation that it will reward him by leading him to some satisfactory
result--and he finds himself in a blind alley, or, as the French put
it (I speak French fluently), in a _cool de sack_. Do I make my meaning
clear, Mr. Sarrazin?”

“Not the least in the world, ma’am.”

“How very extraordinary! Perhaps I have been misled by my own vivid
imagination. Let me endeavor to express myself plainly--let me say that
my fancy looks prophetically at what you are going to do, and sincerely
wishes you well out of it. Pray go on.”

“And pray speak more plainly than my mother has spoken,” Mrs. Linley
added. “As I understood what you said just now, there is a law, after
all, that will protect me in the possession of my little girl. I don’t
care what it costs; I want that law.”

“May I ask first,” Mr. Sarrazin stipulated, “whether you are positively
resolved not to give way to your husband in this matter of Kitty?”

“Positively.”

“One more question, if you please, on a matter of fact. I have heard
that you were married in Scotland. Is that true?”

“Quite true.”

Mr. Sarrazin exhibited himself once more in a highly unprofessional
aspect. He clapped his hands, and cried, “Bravo!” as if he had been in a
theater.

Mrs. Linley caught the infection of the lawyer’s excitement. “How dull
I am!” she exclaimed. “There is a thing they call ‘incompatibility of
temper’--and married people sign a paper at the lawyer’s and promise
never to trouble each other again as long as they both live. And they’re
readier to do it in Scotland than they are in England. That’s what you
mean--isn’t it?”

Mr. Sarrazin found it necessary to reassume his professional character.

“No, indeed, madam,” he said, “I should be unworthy of your confidence
if I proposed nothing better than that. You can only secure the sole
possession of little Kitty by getting the help of a judge--”

“Get it at once,” Mrs. Linley interposed.

“And you can only prevail on the judge to listen to you,” Mr. Sarrazin
proceeded, “in one way. Summon your courage, madam. Apply for a
divorce.”

There was a sudden silence. Mrs. Linley rose trembling, as if she
saw--not good Mr. Sarrazin--but the devil himself tempting her. “Do you
hear that?” she said to her mother.

Mrs. Presty only bowed.

“Think of the dreadful exposure!”

Mrs. Presty bowed again.

The lawyer had his opportunity now.

“Well, Mrs. Linley,” he asked, “what do you say?”

“No--never!” She made that positive reply; and disposed beforehand of
everything that might have been urged, in the way of remonstrance and
persuasion, by leaving the room. The two persons who remained, sitting
opposite to each other, took opposite views.

“Mr. Sarrazin, she won’t do it.”

“Mrs. Presty, she will.”




Chapter XXVI. Decision.


Punctual to his fishing appointment with Kitty, Mr. Sarrazin was out in
the early morning, waiting on the pier.

Not a breath of wind was stirring; the lazy mist lay asleep on the
further shore of the lake. Here and there only the dim tops of the hills
rose like shadows cast by the earth on the faint gray of the sky. Nearer
at hand, the waters of the lake showed a gloomy surface; no birds flew
over the colorless calm; no passing insects tempted the fish to
rise. From time to time a last-left leaf on the wooded shore dropped
noiselessly and died. No vehicles passed as yet on the lonely road; no
voices were audible from the village; slow and straight wreaths of smoke
stole their way out of the chimneys, and lost their vapor in the misty
sky. The one sound that disturbed the sullen repose of the morning was
the tramp of the lawyer’s footsteps, as he paced up and down the pier.
He thought of London and its ceaseless traffic, its roaring high tide of
life in action--and he said to himself, with the strong conviction of a
town-bred man: How miserable this is!

A voice from the garden cheered him, just as he reached the end of the
pier for the fiftieth time, and looked with fifty-fold intensity of
dislike at the dreary lake.

There stood Kitty behind the garden-gate, with a fishing-rod in each
hand. A tin box was strapped on one side of her little body and a basket
on the other. Burdened with these impediments, she required assistance.
Susan had let her out of the house; and Samuel must now open the gate
for her. She was pleased to observe that the raw morning had reddened
her friend’s nose; and she presented her own nose to notice as
exhibiting perfect sympathy in this respect. Feeling a misplaced
confidence in Mr. Sarrazin’s knowledge and experience as an angler, she
handed the fishing-rods to him. “My fingers are cold,” she said; “you
bait the hooks.” He looked at his young friend in silent perplexity; she
pointed to the tin box. “Plenty of bait there, Samuel; we find maggots
do best.” Mr. Sarrazin eyed the box with undisguised disgust; and Kitty
made an unexpected discovery. “You seem to know nothing about it,” she
said. And Samuel answered, cordially, “Nothing!” In five minutes more he
found himself by the side of his young friend--with his hook baited, his
line in the water, and strict injunctions to keep an eye on the float.

They began to fish.

Kitty looked at her companion, and looked away again in silence. By way
of encouraging her to talk, the good-natured lawyer alluded to what she
had said when they parted overnight. “You wanted to ask me something,”
 he reminded her. “What is it?”

Without one preliminary word of warning to prepare him for the shock,
Kitty answered: “I want you to tell me what has become of papa, and why
Syd has gone away and left me. You know who Syd is, don’t you?”

The only alternative left to Mr. Sarrazin was to plead ignorance. While
Kitty was instructing him on the subject of her governess, he had time
to consider what he should say to her next. The result added one more to
the lost opportunities of Mr. Sarrazin’s life.

“You see,” the child gravely continued, “you are a clever man; and you
have come here to help mamma. I have got that much out of grandmamma, if
I have got nothing else. Don’t look at me; look at your float. My papa
has gone away and Syd has left me without even saying good-by, and we
have given up our nice old house in Scotland and come to live here. I
tell you I don’t understand it. If you see your float begin to tremble,
and then give a little dip down as if it was going to sink, pull your
line out of the water; you will most likely find a fish at the end of
it. When I ask mamma what all this means, she says there is a reason,
and I am not old enough to understand it, and she looks unhappy, and
she gives me a kiss, and it ends in that way. You’ve got a bite; no you
haven’t; it’s only a nibble; fish are so sly. And grandmamma is worse
still. Sometimes she tells me I’m a spoiled child; and sometimes she
says well-behaved little girls don’t ask questions. That’s nonsense--and
I think it’s hard on me. You look uncomfortable. Is it my fault? I don’t
want to bother you; I only want to know why Syd has gone away. When I
was younger I might have thought the fairies had taken her. Oh, no! that
won’t do any longer; I’m too old. Now tell me.”

Mr. Sarrazin weakly attempted to gain time: he looked at his watch.
Kitty looked over his shoulder: “Oh, we needn’t be in a hurry; breakfast
won’t be ready for half an hour yet. Plenty of time to talk of Syd; go
on.”

Most unwisely (seeing that he had to deal with a clever child, and
that child a girl), Mr. Sarrazin tried flat denial as a way out of the
difficulty. He said: “I don’t know why she has gone away.” The next
question followed instantly: “Well, then, what do you _think_ about it?”
 In sheer despair, the persecuted friend said the first thing that came
into his head.

“I think she has gone to be married.”

Kitty was indignant.

“Gone to be married, and not tell me!” she exclaimed. “What do you mean
by that?”

Mr. Sarrazin’s professional experience of women and marriages failed
to supply him with an answer. In this difficulty he exerted his
imagination, and invented something that no woman ever did yet. “She’s
waiting,” he said, “to see how her marriage succeeds, before she tells
anybody about it.”

This sounded probable to the mind of a child.

“I hope she hasn’t married a beast,” Kitty said, with a serious face and
an ominous shake of the head. “When shall I hear from Syd?”

Mr. Sarrazin tried another prevarication--with better results this
time. “You will be the first person she writes to, of course.” As that
excusable lie passed his lips, his float began to tremble. Here was a
chance of changing the subject--“I’ve got a fish!” he cried.

Kitty was immediately interested. She threw down her own rod, and
assisted her ignorant companion. A wretched little fish appeared in the
air, wriggling. “It’s a roach,” Kitty pronounced. “It’s in pain,” the
merciful lawyer added; “give it to me.” Kitty took it off the hook, and
obeyed. Mr. Sarrazin with humane gentleness of handling put it back
into the water. “Go, and God bless you,” said this excellent man, as
the roach disappeared joyously with a flick of its tail. Kitty was
scandalized. “That’s not sport!” she said. “Oh, yes, it is,” he
answered--“sport to the fish.”

They went on with their angling. What embarrassing question would Kitty
ask next? Would she want to be told why her father had left her? No: the
last image in the child’s mind had been the image of Sydney Westerfield.
She was still thinking of it when she spoke again.

“I wonder whether you’re right about Syd?” she began. “You might be
mistaken, mightn’t you? I sometimes fancy mamma and Sydney may have had
a quarrel. Would you mind asking mamma if that’s true?” the affectionate
little creature said, anxiously. “You see, I can’t help talking of Syd,
I’m so fond of her; and I do miss her so dreadfully every now and then;
and I’m afraid--oh, dear, dear, I’m afraid I shall never see her again!”
 She let her rod drop on the pier, and put her little hands over her face
and burst out crying.

Shocked and distressed, good Mr. Sarrazin kissed her, and consoled her,
and told another excusable lie.

“Try to be comforted, Kitty; I’m sure you will see her again.”

His conscience reproached him as he held out that false hope. It could
never be! The one unpardonable sin, in the judgment of fallible
human creatures like herself, was the sin that Sydney Westerfield had
committed. Is there something wrong in human nature? or something wrong
in human laws? All that is best and noblest in us feels the influence
of love--and the rules of society declare that an accident of position
shall decide whether love is a virtue or a crime.

These thoughts were in the lawyer’s mind. They troubled him and
disheartened him: it was a relief rather than an interruption when he
felt Kitty’s hand on his arm. She had dried her tears, with a child’s
happy facility in passing from one emotion to another, and was now
astonished and interested by a marked change in the weather.

“Look for the lake!” she cried. “You can’t see it.”

A dense white fog was closing round them. Its stealthy advance over the
water had already begun to hide the boathouse at the end of the pier
from view. The raw cold of the atmosphere made the child shiver. As Mr.
Sarrazin took her hand to lead her indoors, he turned and looked back
at the faint outline of the boathouse, disappearing in the fog. Kitty
wondered. “Do you see anything?” she asked.

He answered that there was nothing to see, in the absent tone of a man
busy with his own thoughts. They took the garden path which led to the
cottage. As they reached the door he roused himself, and looked round
again in the direction of the invisible lake.

“Was the boat-house of any use now,” he inquired--“was there a boat in
it, for instance?” “There was a capital boat, fit to go anywhere.” “And
a man to manage it?” “To be sure! the gardener was the man; he had been
a sailor once; and he knew the lake as well as--” Kitty stopped, at a
loss for a comparison. “As well as you know your multiplication table?”
 said Mr. Sarrazin, dropping his serious questions on a sudden. Kitty
shook her head. “Much better,” she honestly acknowledged.

Opening the breakfast-room door they saw Mrs. Presty making coffee.
Kitty at once retired. When she had been fishing, her grandmamma
inculcated habits of order by directing her to take the rods to pieces,
and to put them away in their cases in the lumber-room. While she was
absent, Mr. Sarrazin profited by the opportunity, and asked if Mrs.
Linley had thought it over in the night, and had decided on applying for
a Divorce.

“I know nothing about my daughter,” Mrs. Presty answered, “except that
she had a bad night. Thinking, no doubt, over your advice,” the old lady
added with a mischievous smile.

“Will you kindly inquire if Mrs. Linley has made up her mind yet?” the
lawyer ventured to say.

“Isn’t that your business?” Mrs. Presty asked slyly. “Suppose you write
a little note, and I will send it up to her room.” The worldly-wisdom
which prompted this suggestion contemplated a possible necessity for
calling a domestic council, assembled to consider the course of action
which Mrs. Linley would do well to adopt. If the influence of her
mother was among the forms of persuasion which might be tried, that wary
relative maneuvered to make the lawyer speak first, and so to reserve to
herself the advantage of having the last word.

Patient Mr. Sarrazin wrote the note.

He modestly asked for instructions; and he was content to receive them
in one word--Yes or No. In the event of the answer being Yes, he would
ask for a few minutes’ conversation with Mrs. Linley, at her earliest
convenience. That was all.

The reply was returned in a form which left Yes to be inferred: “I will
receive you as soon as you have finished your breakfast.”



Chapter XXVII. Resolution.


Having read Mrs. Linley’s answer, Mr. Sarrazin looked out of the
breakfast-room window, and saw that the fog had reached the cottage.
Before Mrs. Presty could make any remark on the change in the weather,
he surprised her by an extraordinary question.

“Is there an upper room here, ma’am, which has a view of the road before
your front gate?”

“Certainly!”

“And can I go into it without disturbing anybody?”

Mrs. Presty said, “Of course!” with an uplifting of her eye brows which
expressed astonishment not unmixed with suspicion. “Do you want to go up
now?” she added, “or will you wait till you have had your breakfast?”

“I want to go up, if you please, before the fog thickens. Oh, Mrs.
Presty, I am ashamed to trouble you! Let the servant show me the room.”

No. For the first time in her life Mrs. Presty insisted on doing
servant’s duty. If she had been crippled in both legs her curiosity
would have helped her to get up the stairs on her hands. “There!” she
said, opening the door of the upper room, and placing herself exactly in
the middle of it, so that she could see all round her: “Will that do for
you?”

Mr. Sarrazin went to the window; hid himself behind the curtain; and
cautiously peeped out. In half a minute he turned his back on the misty
view of the road, and said to himself: “Just what I expected.”

Other women might have asked what this mysterious proceeding meant.
Mrs. Presty’s sense of her own dignity adopted a system of independent
discovery. To Mr. Sarrazin’s amusement, she imitated him to his face.
Advancing to the window, she, too, hid herself behind the curtain, and
she, too, peeped out. Still following her model, she next turned her
back on the view--and then she became herself again. “Now we have both
looked out of window,” she said to the lawyer, in her own inimitably
impudent way, “suppose we compare our impressions.”

This was easily done. They had both seen the same two men walking
backward and forward, opposite the front gate of the cottage. Before
the advancing fog made it impossible to identify him, Mr. Sarrazin
had recognized in one of the men his agreeable fellow-traveler on the
journey from London. The other man--a stranger--was in all probability
an assistant spy obtained in the neighborhood. This discovery suggested
serious embarrassment in the future. Mrs. Presty asked what was to be
done next. Mr. Sarrazin answered: “Let us have our breakfast.”

In another quarter of an hour they were both in Mrs. Linley’s room.

Her agitated manner, her reddened eyes, showed that she was still
suffering under the emotions of the past night. The moment the lawyer
approached her, she crossed the room with hurried steps, and took both
his hands in her trembling grasp. “You are a good man, you are a kind
man,” she said to him wildly; “you have my truest respect and regard.
Tell me, are you--really--really--really sure that the one way in which
I can keep my child with me is the way you mentioned last night?”

Mr. Sarrazin led her gently back to her chair.

The sad change in her startled and distressed him. Sincerely,
solemnly even, he declared that the one alternative before her was the
alternative that he had mentioned. He entreated her to control herself.
It was useless, she still held him as if she was holding to her last
hope.

“Listen to me!” she cried. “There’s something more; there’s another
chance for me. I must, and will, know what you think of it.”

“Wait a little. Pray wait a little!”

“No! not a moment. Is there any hope in appealing to the lawyer whom Mr.
Linley has employed? Let me go back with you to London. I will persuade
him to exert his influence--I will go down on my knees to him--I will
never leave him till I have won him over to my side--I will take Kitty
with me; he shall see us both, and pity us, and help us!”

“Hopeless. Quite hopeless, Mrs. Linley.”

“Oh, don’t say that!”

“My dear lady, my poor dear lady, I must say it. The man you are talking
of is the last man in the world to be influenced as you suppose. He is
notoriously a lawyer, and nothing but a lawyer. If you tried to move him
to pity you, he would say, ‘Madam, I am doing my duty to my client’; and
he would ring his bell and have you shown out. Yes! even if he saw you
crushed and crying at his feet.”

Mrs. Presty interfered for the first time.

“In your place, Catherine,” she said, “I would put my foot down on that
man and crush _him_. Consent to the Divorce, and you may do it.”

Mrs. Linley lay prostrate in her chair. The excitement which had
sustained her thus far seemed to have sunk with the sinking of her last
hope. Pale, exhausted, yielding to hard necessity, she looked up
when her mother said, “Consent to the Divorce,” and answered, “I have
consented.”

“And trust me,” Mr. Sarrazin said fervently, “to see that Justice is
done, and to protect you in the meanwhile.”

Mrs. Presty added her tribute of consolation.

“After all,” she asked, “what is there to terrify you in the prospect
of a Divorce? You won’t hear what people say about it--for we see no
society now. And, as for the newspapers, keep them out of the house.”

Mrs. Linley answered with a momentary revival of energy:

“It is not the fear of exposure that has tortured me,” she said. “When I
was left in the solitude of the night, my heart turned to Kitty; I felt
that any sacrifice of myself might be endured for her sake. It’s the
remembrance of my marriage, Mr. Sarrazin, that is the terrible trial to
me. Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Is there
nothing to terrify me in setting that solemn command at defiance? I do
it--oh, I do it--in consenting to the Divorce! I renounce the vows
which I bound myself to respect in the presence of God; I profane the
remembrance of eight happy years, hallowed by true love. Ah, you needn’t
remind me of what my husband has done. I don’t forget how cruelly he has
wronged me; I don’t forget that his own act has cast me from him. But
whose act destroys our marriage? Mine, mine! Forgive me, mamma; forgive
me, my kind friend--the horror that I have of myself forces its way to
my lips. No more of it! My child is my one treasure left. What must I do
next? What must I sign? What must I sacrifice? Tell me--and it shall be
done. I submit! I submit!”

Delicately and mercifully Mr. Sarrazin answered that sad appeal.

All that his knowledge, experience and resolution could suggest he
addressed to Mrs. Presty. Mrs. Linley could listen or not listen, as
her own wishes inclined. In the one case or in the other, her interests
would be equally well served. The good lawyer kissed her hand. “Rest,
and recover,” he whispered. And then he turned to her mother--and became
a man of business once more.

“The first thing I shall do, ma’am, is to telegraph to my agent in
Edinburgh. He will arrange for the speediest possible hearing of our
case in the Court of Session. Make your mind easy so far.”

Mrs. Presty’s mind was by this time equally inaccessible to information
and advice. “I want to know what is to be done with those two men who
are watching the gate,” was all she said in the way of reply.

Mrs. Linley raised her head in alarm.

“Two!” she exclaimed--and looked at Mr. Sarrazin. “You only spoke of one
last night.”

“And I add another this morning. Rest your poor head, Mrs. Linley, I
know how it aches; I know how it burns.” He still persisted in speaking
to Mrs. Presty. “One of those two men will follow me to the station, and
see me off on my way to London. The other will look after you, or your
daughter, or the maid, or any other person who may try to get away into
hiding with Kitty. And they are both keeping close to the gate, in the
fear of losing sight of us in the fog.”

“I wish we lived in the Middle Ages!” said Mrs. Presty.

“What would be the use of that, ma’am?”

“Good heavens, Mr. Sarrazin, don’t you see? In those grand old days you
would have taken a dagger, and the gardener would have taken a dagger,
and you would have stolen out, and stabbed those two villains as a
matter of course. And this is the age of progress! The vilest rogue in
existence is a sacred person whose life we are bound to respect. Ah,
what good that national hero would have done who put his barrels of
gunpowder in the right place on the Fifth of November! I have always
said it, and I stick to it, Guy Fawkes was a great statesman.”

In the meanwhile Mrs. Linley was not resting, and not listening to
the expression of her mother’s political sentiments. She was intently
watching Mr. Sarrazin’s face.

“There is danger threatening us,” she said. “Do you see a way out of
it?”

To persist in trying to spare her was plainly useless; Mr. Sarrazin
answered her directly.

“The danger of legal proceedings to obtain possession of the child,”
 he said, “is more near and more serious than I thought it right
to acknowledge, while you were in doubt which way to decide. I was
careful--too careful, perhaps--not to unduly influence you in a matter
of the utmost importance to your future life. But you have made up your
mind. I don’t scruple now to remind you that an interval of time must
pass before the decree for your Divorce can be pronounced, and the care
of the child be legally secured to the mother. The only doubt and the
only danger are there. If you are not frightened by the prospect of a
desperate venture which some women would shrink from, I believe I see a
way of baffling the spies.”

Mrs. Linley started to her feet. “Say what I am to do,” she cried, “and
judge for yourself if I am as easily frightened as some women.”

The lawyer pointed with a persuasive smile to her empty chair. “If
you allow yourself to be excited,” he said, “you will frighten me.
Please--oh, please sit down again!”

Mrs. Linley felt the strong will, asserting itself in terms of courteous
entreaty. She obeyed. Mrs. Presty had never admired the lawyer as she
admired him now. “Is that how you manage your wife?” she asked.

Mr. Sarrazin was equal to the occasion, whatever it might be. “In your
time, ma’am,” he said, “did you reveal the mysteries of conjugal life?”
 He turned to Mrs. Linley. “I have something to ask first,” he resumed,
“and then you shall hear what I propose. How many people serve you in
this cottage?”

“Three. Our landlady, who is housekeeper and cook. Our own maid. And the
landlady’s daughter, who does the housework.”

“Any out-of-door servants?”

“Only the gardener.”

“Can you trust these people?”

“In what way, Mr. Sarrazin?”

“Can you trust them with a secret which only concerns yourself?”

“Certainly! The maid has been with us for years; no truer woman ever
lived. The good old landlady often drinks tea with us. Her daughter
is going to be married; and I have given the wedding-dress. As for the
gardener, let Kitty settle the matter with him, and I answer for the
rest. Why are you pointing to the window?”

“Look out, and tell me what you see.”

“I see the fog.”

“And I, Mrs. Linley, have seen the boathouse. While the spies are
watching your gate, what do you say to crossing the lake, under cover of
the fog?”




FOURTH BOOK.


Chapter XXVIII. Mr. Randal Linley.


Winter had come and gone; spring was nearing its end, and London still
suffered under the rigid regularity of easterly winds. Although in less
than a week summer would begin with the first of June, Mr. Sarrazin was
glad to find his office warmed by a fire, when he arrived to open the
letters of the day.

The correspondence in general related exclusively to proceedings
connected with the law. Two letters only presented an exception to the
general rule. The first was addressed in Mrs. Linley’s handwriting, and
bore the postmark of Hanover. Kitty’s mother had not only succeeded in
getting to the safe side of the lake--she and her child had crossed
the German Ocean as well. In one respect her letter was a remarkable
composition. Although it was written by a lady, it was short enough to
be read in less than a minute:



“MY DEAR MR. SARRAZIN--I have just time to write by this evening’s post.
Our excellent courier has satisfied himself that the danger of discovery
has passed away. The wretches have been so completely deceived that
they are already on their way back to England, to lie in wait for us
at Folkestone and Dover. To-morrow morning we leave this charming
place--oh, how unwillingly!--for Bremen, to catch the steamer to Hull.
You shall hear from me again on our arrival. Gratefully yours,

“CATHERINE LINLEY.”


Mr. Sarrazin put this letter into a private drawer and smiled as he
turned the key. “Has she made up her mind at last?” he asked himself.
“But for the courier, I shouldn’t feel sure of her even now.”

The second letter agreeably surprised him. It was announced that the
writer had just returned from the United States; it invited him
to dinner that evening; and it was signed “Randal Linley.” In Mr.
Sarrazin’s estimation, Randal had always occupied a higher place than
his brother. The lawyer had known Mrs. Linley before her marriage, and
had been inclined to think that she would have done wisely if she
had given her hand to the younger brother instead of the elder. His
acquaintance with Randal ripened rapidly into friendship. But his
relations with Herbert made no advance toward intimacy: there was a
gentlemanlike cordiality between them, and nothing more.

At seven o’clock the two friends sat at a snug little table, in the
private room of a hotel, with an infinite number of questions to ask
of each other, and with nothing to interrupt them but a dinner of such
extraordinary merit that it insisted on being noticed, from the first
course to the last.

Randal began. “Before we talk of anything else,” he said, “tell me about
Catherine and the child. Where are they?”

“On their way to England, after a residence in Germany.”

“And the old lady?”

“Mrs. Presty has been staying with friends in London.”

“What! have they parted company? Has there been a quarrel?”

“Nothing of the sort; a friendly separation, in the strictest sense of
the word. Oh, Randal, what are you about? Don’t put pepper into this
perfect soup. It’s as good as the _gras double_ at the Cafe Anglais in
Paris.”

“So it is; I wasn’t paying proper attention to it. But I am anxious
about Catherine. Why did she go abroad?”

“Haven’t you heard from her?”

“Not for six months or more. I innocently vexed her by writing a
little too hopefully about Herbert. Mrs. Presty answered my letter,
and recommended me not to write again. It isn’t like Catherine to bear
malice.”

“Don’t even think such a thing possible!” the lawyer answered,
earnestly. “Attribute her silence to the right cause. Terrible anxieties
have been weighing on her mind since you went to America.”

“Anxieties caused by my brother? Oh, I hope not!”

“Caused entirely by your brother--if I must tell the truth. Can’t you
guess how?”

“Is it the child? You don’t mean to tell me that Herbert has taken Kitty
away from her mother!”

“While I am her mother’s lawyer, my friend, your brother won’t do that.
Welcome back to England in the first glass of sherry; good wine, but a
little too dry for my taste. No, we won’t talk of domestic troubles
just yet. You shall hear all about it after dinner. What made you go to
America? You haven’t been delivering lectures, have you?”

“I have been enjoying myself among the most hospitable people in the
world.”

Mr. Sarrazin shook his head; he had a case of copyright in hand just
then. “A people to be pitied,” he said.

“Why?”

“Because their Government forgets what is due to the honor of the
nation.”

“How?”

“In this way. The honor of a nation which confers right of property
in works of art, produced by its own citizens, is surely concerned in
protecting from theft works of art produced by other citizens.”

“That’s not the fault of the people.”

“Certainly not. I have already said it’s the fault of the Government.
Let’s attend to the fish now.”

Randal took his friend’s advice. “Good sauce, isn’t it?” he said.

The epicure entered a protest. “Good?” he repeated. “My dear fellow,
it’s absolute perfection. I don’t like to cast a slur on English
cookery. But think of melted butter, and tell me if anybody but a
foreigner (I don’t like foreigners, but I give them their due) could
have produced this white wine sauce? So you really had no particular
motive in going to America?”

“On the contrary, I had a very particular motive. Just remember what
my life used to be when I was in Scotland--and look at my life now!
No Mount Morven; no model farm to look after; no pleasant Highland
neighbors; I can’t go to my brother while he is leading his present
life; I have hurt Catherine’s feelings; I have lost dear little Kitty;
I am not obliged to earn my living (more’s the pity); I don’t care
about politics; I have a pleasure in eating harmless creatures, but no
pleasure in shooting them. What is there left for me to do, but to try
change of scene, and go roaming around the world, a restless creature
without an object in life? Have I done something wrong again? It isn’t
the pepper this time--and yet you’re looking at me as if I was trying
your temper.”

The French side of Mr. Sarrazin’s nature had got the better of him once
more. He pointed indignantly to a supreme preparation of fowl on his
friend’s plate. “Do I actually see you picking out your truffles, and
putting them on one side?” he asked.

“Well,” Randal acknowledged, “I don’t care about truffles.”

Mr. Sarrazin rose, with his plate in his hand and his fork ready for
action. He walked round the table to his friend’s side, and reverently
transferred the neglected truffles to his own plate. “Randal, you will
live to repent this,” he said solemnly. “In the meantime, I am the
gainer.” Until he had finished the truffles, no word fell from his
lips. “I think I should have enjoyed them more,” he remarked, “if I had
concentrated my attention by closing my eyes; but you would have thought
I was going to sleep.” He recovered his English nationality, after this,
until the dessert had been placed on the table, and the waiter was
ready to leave the room. At that auspicious moment, he underwent another
relapse. He insisted on sending his compliments and thanks to the cook.

“At last,” said Randal, “we are by ourselves--and now I want to know why
Catherine went to Germany.”



Chapter XXIX.

Mr. Sarrazin.

As a lawyer, Randal’s guest understood that a narrative of events can
only produce the right effect, on one condition: it must begin at the
beginning. Having related all that had been said and done during his
visit to the cottage, including his first efforts in the character of
an angler under Kitty’s supervision, he stopped to fill his glass
again--and then astonished Randal by describing the plan that he had
devised for escaping from the spies by crossing the lake in the fog.

“What did the ladies say to it?” Randal inquired. “Who spoke first?”

“Mrs. Presty, of course! She objected to risk her life on the water, in
a fog. Mrs. Linley showed a resolution for which I was not prepared. She
thought of Kitty, saw the value of my suggestion, and went away at once
to consult with the landlady. In the meantime I sent for the gardener,
and told him what I was thinking of. He was one of those stolid
Englishmen, who possess resources which don’t express themselves
outwardly. Judging by his face, you would have said he was subsiding
into a slumber under the infliction of a sermon, instead of listening
to a lawyer proposing a stratagem. When I had done, the man showed the
metal he was made of. In plain English, he put three questions which
gave me the highest opinion of his intelligence. ‘How much luggage,
sir?’ ‘As little as they can conveniently take with them,’ I said. ‘How
many persons?’ ‘The two ladies, the child, and myself.’ ‘Can you row,
sir?’ ‘In any water you like, Mr. Gardener, fresh or salt’. Think of
asking Me, an athletic Englishman, if I could row! In an hour more we
were ready to embark, and the blessed fog was thicker than ever. Mrs.
Presty yielded under protest; Kitty was wild with delight; her mother
was quiet and resigned. But one circumstance occurred that I didn’t
quite understand--the presence of a stranger on the pier with a gun in
his hand.”

“You don’t mean one of the spies?”

“Nothing of the sort; I mean an idea of the gardener’s. He had been a
sailor in his time--and that’s a trade which teaches a man (if he’s
good for anything) to think, and act on his thought, at one and the same
moment. He had taken a peep at the blackguards in front of the house,
and had recognized the shortest of the two as a native of the place,
perfectly well aware that one of the features attached to the cottage
was a boathouse. ‘That chap is not such a fool as he looks,’ says the
gardener. ‘If he mentions the boat-house, the other fellow from London
may have his suspicions. I thought I would post my son on the pier--that
quiet young man there with the gun--to keep a lookout. If he sees
another boat (there are half a dozen on this side of the lake) putting
off after us, he has orders to fire, on the chance of our hearing him.
A little notion of mine, sir, to prevent our being surprised in the fog.
Do you see any objection to it?’ Objection! In the days when diplomacy
was something more than a solemn pretense, what a member of Congress
that gardener would have made! Well, we shipped our oars, and away we
went. Not quite haphazard--for we had a compass with us. Our course was
as straight as we could go, to a village on the opposite side of the
lake, called Brightfold. Nothing happened for the first quarter of an
hour--and then, by the living Jingo (excuse my vulgarity), we heard the
gun!”

“What did you do?”

“Went on rowing, and held a council. This time I came out as the clever
one of the party. The men were following us in the dark; they would
have to guess at the direction we had taken, and they would most likely
assume (in such weather as we had) that we should choose the shortest
way across the lake. At my suggestion we changed our course, and made
for a large town, higher up on the shore, called Tawley. We landed, and
waited for events, and made no discovery of another boat behind us. The
fools had justified my confidence in them--they had gone to Brightfold.
There was half-an-hour to spare before the next train came to Tawley;
and the fog was beginning to lift on that side of the lake. We looked at
the shops; and I made a purchase in the town.”

“Stop a minute,” said Randal. “Is Brightfold on the railway?”

“No.”

“Is there an electric telegraph at the place?”

“Yes.”

“That was awkward, wasn’t it? The first thing those men would do would
be to telegraph to Tawley.”

“Not a doubt of it. How would they describe us, do you think?”

Randal answered. “A middle-aged gentleman--two ladies, one of them
elderly--and a little girl. Quite enough to identify you at Tawley, if
the station-master understood the message.”

“Shall I tell you what the station-master discovered, with the message
in his hand? No elderly lady, no middle-aged gentleman; nothing more
remarkable than _one_ lady--and a little boy.”

Randal’s face brightened. “You parted company, of course,” he said; “and
you disguised Kitty! How did you manage it?”

“Didn’t I say just now that we looked at the shops, and that I made a
purchase in the town? A boy’s ready-made suit--not at all a bad fit for
Kitty! Mrs. Linley put on the suit, and tucked up the child’s hair under
a straw hat, in an empty yard--no idlers about in that bad weather. We
said good-by, and parted, with grievous misgivings on my side, which
proved (thank God!) to have been quite needless. Kitty and her mother
went to the station, and Mrs. Presty and I hired a carriage, and drove
away to the head of the lake, to catch the train to London. Do you know,
Randal, I have altered my opinion of Mrs. Presty?”

Randal smiled. “You too have found something in that old woman,” he
said, “which doesn’t appear on the surface.”

“The occasion seems to bring that something out,” the lawyer remarked.
“When I proposed the separation, and mentioned my reasons, I expected
to find some difficulty in persuading Mrs. Presty to give up the
adventurous journey with her daughter and her grandchild. I reminded her
that she had friends in London who would receive her, and got snubbed
for taking the liberty. ‘I know that as well as you do. Come along--I’m
ready to go with you.’ It isn’t agreeable to my self-esteem to own it,
but I expected to hear her say that she would consent to any sacrifice
for the sake of her dear daughter. No such clap-trap as that passed her
lips. She owned the true motive with a superiority to cant which won
my sincerest respect. ‘I’ll do anything,’ she said, ‘to baffle Herbert
Linley and the spies he has set to watch us.’ I can’t tell you how glad
I was that she had her reward on the same day. We were too late at the
station, and we had to wait for the next train. And what do you think
happened? The two scoundrels followed us instead of following Mrs.
Linley! They had inquired no doubt at the livery stables where we hired
the carriage--had recognized the description of us--and had taken the
long journey to London for nothing. Mrs. Presty and I shook hands at the
terminus the best friends that ever traveled together with the best of
motives. After that, I think I deserve another glass of wine.”

“Go on with your story, and you shall have another bottle!” cried
Randal. “What did Catherine and the child do after they left you?”

“They did the safest thing--they left England. Mrs. Linley distinguished
herself on this occasion. It was her excellent idea to avoid popular
ports of departure, like Folkestone and Dover, which were sure to be
watched, and to get away (if the thing could be done) from some place on
the east coast. We consulted our guide and found that a line of steamers
sailed from Hull to Bremen once a week. A tedious journey from our part
of Cumberland, with some troublesome changing of trains, but they got
there in time to embark. My first news of them reached me in a telegram
from Bremen. There they waited for further instructions. I sent the
instructions by a thoroughly capable and trustworthy man--an Italian
courier, known to me by an experience of twenty years. Shall I confess
it? I thought I had done rather a clever thing in providing Mrs. Linley
with a friend in need while I was away from her.”

“I think so, too,” said Randal.

“Wrong, completely wrong. I had made a mistake--I had been too clever,
and I got my reward accordingly. You know how I advised Mrs. Linley?”

“Yes. You persuaded her, with the greatest difficulty, to apply for a
Divorce.”

“Very well. I had made all the necessary arrangements for the trial,
when I received a letter from Germany. My charming client had changed
her mind, and declined to apply for the Divorce. There was my reward for
having been too clever!”

“I don’t understand you.”

“My dear fellow, you are dull to-night. I had been so successful in
protecting Mrs. Linley and the child, and my excellent courier had
found such a charming place of retreat for them in one of the suburbs of
Hanover, that ‘she saw no reason now for taking the shocking course
that I had recommended to her--so repugnant to all her most cherished
convictions; so sinful and so shameful in its doing of evil that good
might come. Experience had convinced her that (thanks to me) there was
no fear of Kitty being discovered and taken from her. She therefore
begged me to write to my agent in Edinburgh, and tell him that her
application to the court was withdrawn.’ Ah, you understand my position
at last. The headstrong woman was running a risk which renewed all my
anxieties. By every day’s post I expected to hear that she had paid the
penalty of her folly, and that your brother had succeeded in getting
possession of the child. Wait a little before you laugh at me. But for
the courier, the thing would have really happened a week since.”

Randal looked astonished. “Months must have passed,” he objected.
“Surely, after that lapse of time, Mrs. Linley must have been safe from
discovery.”

“Take your own positive view of it! I only know that the thing happened.
And why not? The luck had begun by being on one side--why shouldn’t the
other side have had its turn next?”

“Do you really believe in luck?”

“Devoutly. A lawyer must believe in something. He knows the law too well
to put any faith in that: and his clients present to him (if he is a man
of any feeling) a hideous view of human nature. The poor devil believes
in luck--rather than believe in nothing. I think it quite likely that
accident helped the person employed by the husband to discover the wife
and child. Anyhow, Mrs. Linley and Kitty were seen in the streets of
Hanover; seen, recognized, and followed. The courier happened to be with
them--luck again! For thirty years and more, he had been traveling
in every part of Europe; there was not a landlord of the smallest
pretensions anywhere who didn’t know him and like him. ‘I pretended not
to see that anybody was following us,’ he said (writing from Hanover
to relieve my anxiety); ‘and I took the ladies to a hotel. The hotel
possessed two merits from our point of view--it had a way out at the
back, through the stables, and it was kept by a landlord who was an
excellent good friend of mine. I arranged with him what he was to say
when inquiries were made; and I kept my poor ladies prisoners in their
lodgings for three days. The end of it is that Mr. Linley’s policeman
has gone away to watch the Channel steam-service, while we return
quietly by way of Bremen and Hull.’ There is the courier’s account of
it. I have only to add that poor Mrs. Linley has been fairly frightened
into submission. She changes her mind again, and pledges herself once
more to apply for the Divorce. If we are only lucky enough to get our
case heard without any very serious delay, I am not afraid of my client
slipping through my fingers for the second time. When will the courts of
session be open to us? You have lived in Scotland, Randal--”

“But I haven’t lived in the courts of law. I wish I could give you the
information you want.”

Mr. Sarrazin looked at his watch. “For all I know to the contrary,” he
said, “we may be wasting precious time while we are talking here. Will
you excuse me if I go away to my club?”

“Are you going in search of information?”

“Yes. We have some inveterate old whist-players who are always to be
found in the card-room. One of them formerly practiced, I believe, in
the Scotch courts. It has just occurred to me that the chance is worth
trying.”

“Will you let me know if you succeed?” Randal asked.

The lawyer took his hand at parting. “You seem to be almost as anxious
about it as I am,” he said.

“To tell you the truth, I am a little alarmed when I think of Catherine.
If there is another long delay, how do we know what may happen before
the law has confirmed the mother’s claim to the child? Let me send one
of the servants here to wait at your club. Will you give him a line
telling me when the trial is likely to take place?”

“With the greatest pleasure. Good-night.”

Left alone, Randal sat by the fireside for a while, thinking of the
future. The prospect, as he saw it, disheartened him. As a means of
employing his mind on a more agreeable subject for reflection, he opened
his traveling desk and took out two or three letters. They had been
addressed to him, while he was in America, by Captain Bennydeck.

The captain had committed an error of which most of us have been guilty
in our time. He had been too exclusively devoted to work that interested
him to remember what was due to the care of his health. The doctor’s
warnings had been neglected; his over-strained nerves had given way; and
the man whose strong constitution had resisted cold and starvation in
the Arctic wastes, had broken down under stress of brain-work in London.

This was the news which the first of the letters contained.

The second, written under dictation, alluded briefly to the remedies
suggested. In the captain’s case, the fresh air recommended was the air
of the sea. At the same time he was forbidden to receive either letters
or telegrams, during his absence from town, until the doctor had
seen him again. These instructions pointed, in Captain Bennydeck’s
estimation, to sailing for pleasure’s sake, and therefore to hiring a
yacht.

The third and last letter announced that the yacht had been found, and
described the captain’s plans when the vessel was ready for sea.

He proposed to sail here and there about the Channel, wherever it might
please the wind to take him. Friends would accompany him, but not in any
number. The yacht was not large enough to accommodate comfortably more
than one or two guests at a time. Every now and then, the vessel would
come to an anchor in the bay of the little coast town of Sandyseal, to
accommodate friends going and coming and (in spite of medical advice) to
receive letters. “You may have heard of Sandyseal,” the Captain wrote,
“as one of the places which have lately been found out by the doctors.
They are recommending the air to patients suffering from nervous
disorders all over England. The one hotel in the place, and the few
cottages which let lodgings, are crammed, as I hear, and the speculative
builder is beginning his operations at such a rate that Sandyseal will
be no longer recognizable in a few months more. Before the crescents
and terraces and grand hotels turn the town into a fashionable
watering-place, I want to take a last look at scenes familiar to me
under their old aspect. If you are inclined to wonder at my feeling
such a wish as this, I can easily explain myself. Two miles inland from
Sandyseal, there is a lonely old moated house. In that house I was born.
When you return from America, write to me at the post-office, or at the
hotel (I am equally well known in both places), and let us arrange for
a speedy meeting. I wish I could ask you to come and see me in my
birth-place. It was sold, years since, under instructions in my father’s
will, and was purchased for the use of a community of nuns. We may look
at the outside, and we can do no more. In the meantime, don’t despair of
my recovery; the sea is my old friend, and my trust is in God’s mercy.”

These last lines were added in a postscript:

“Have you heard any more of that poor girl, the daughter of my old
friend Roderick Westerfield--whose sad story would never have been
known to me but for you? I feel sure that you have good reasons for not
telling me the name of the man who has misled her, or the address at
which she may be found. But you may one day be at liberty to break your
silence. In that case, don’t hesitate to do so because there may happen
to be obstacles in my way. No difficulties discourage me, when my end in
view is the saving of a soul in peril.”

Randal returned to his desk to write to the Captain. He had only got as
far as the first sentences, when the servant returned with the lawyer’s
promised message. Mr. Sarrazin’s news was communicated in these cheering
terms:

“I am a firmer believer in luck than ever. If we only make haste--and
won’t I make haste!--we may get the Divorce, as I calculate, in three
weeks’ time.”




Chapter XXX. The Lord President.


Mrs. Linley’s application for a Divorce was heard in the first division
of the Court of Session at Edinburgh, the Lord President being the
judge.

To the disappointment of the large audience assembled, no defense was
attempted on the part of the husband--a wise decision, seeing that
the evidence of the wife and her witnesses was beyond dispute. But one
exciting incident occurred toward the close of the proceedings. Sudden
illness made Mrs. Linley’s removal necessary, at the moment of all
others most interesting to herself--the moment before the judge’s
decision was announced.

But, as the event proved, the poor lady’s withdrawal was the most
fortunate circumstance that could have occurred, in her own interests.
After condemning the husband’s conduct with unsparing severity, the Lord
President surprised most of the persons present by speaking of the wife
in these terms:

“Grievously as Mrs. Linley has been injured, the evidence shows that she
was herself by no means free from blame. She has been guilty, to say the
least of it, of acts of indiscretion. When the criminal attachment which
had grown up between Mr. Herbert Linley and Miss Westerfield had been
confessed to her, she appears to have most unreasonably overrated
whatever merit there might have been in their resistance to the final
temptation. She was indeed so impulsively ready to forgive (without
waiting to see if the event justified the exercise of mercy) that she
owns to having given her hand to Miss Westerfield, at parting, not half
an hour after that young person’s shameless forgetfulness of the claims
of modesty, duty and gratitude had been first communicated to her. To
say that this was the act of an inconsiderate woman, culpably indiscreet
and, I had almost added, culpably indelicate, is only to say what she
has deserved. On the next occasion to which I feel bound to advert, her
conduct was even more deserving of censure. She herself appears to have
placed the temptation under which he fell in her husband’s way, and so
(in some degree at least) to have provoked the catastrophe which has
brought her before this court. I allude, it is needless to say, to her
having invited the governess--then out of harm’s way; then employed
elsewhere--to return to her house, and to risk (what actually occurred)
a meeting with Mr. Herbert Linley when no third person happened to be
present. I know that the maternal motive which animated Mrs. Linley is
considered, by many persons, to excuse and even to justify that most
regrettable act; and I have myself allowed (I fear weakly allowed) more
than due weight to this consideration in pronouncing for the Divorce.
Let me express the earnest hope that Mrs. Linley will take warning by
what has happened; and, if she finds herself hereafter placed in other
circumstances of difficulty, let me advise her to exercise more control
over impulses which one might expect perhaps to find in a young girl,
but which are neither natural nor excusable in a woman of her age.”

His lordship then decreed the Divorce in the customary form, giving the
custody of the child to the mother.

                       * * * * *

As fast as a hired carriage could take him, Mr. Sarrazin drove from the
court to Mrs. Linley’s lodgings, to tell her that the one great object
of securing her right to her child had been achieved.

At the door he was met by Mrs. Presty. She was accompanied by a
stranger, whose medical services had been required. Interested
professionally in hearing the result of the trial, this gentleman
volunteered to communicate the good news to his patient. He had been
waiting to administer a composing draught, until the suspense from which
Mrs. Linley was suffering might be relieved, and a reasonable hope be
entertained that the medicine would produce the right effect. With that
explanation he left the room.

While the doctor was speaking, Mrs. Presty was drawing her own
conclusions from a close scrutiny of Mr. Sarrazin’s face.

“I am going to make a disagreeable remark,” she announced. “You look ten
years older, sir, than you did when you left us this morning to go to
the Court. Do me a favor--come to the sideboard.” The lawyer having
obeyed, she poured out a glass of wine. “There is the remedy,” she
resumed, “when something has happened to worry you.”

“‘Worry’ isn’t the right word,” Mr. Sarrazin declared. “I’m furious!
It’s a most improper thing for a person in my position to say of a
person in the Lord President’s position; but I do say it--he ought to be
ashamed of himself.”

“After giving us our Divorce!” Mrs. Presty exclaimed. “What has he
done?”

Mr. Sarrazin repeated what the judge had said of Mrs. Linley. “In
my opinion,” he added, “such language as that is an insult to your
daughter.”

“And yet,” Mrs. Presty repeated, “he has given us our Divorce.” She
returned to the sideboard, poured out a second dose of the remedy
against worry, and took it herself. “What sort of character does the
Lord President bear?” she asked when she had emptied her glass.

This seemed to be an extraordinary question to put, under the
circumstances. Mr. Sarrazin answered it, however, to the best of his
ability. “An excellent character,” he said--“that’s the unaccountable
part of it. I hear that he is one of the most careful and considerate
men who ever sat on the bench. Excuse me, Mrs. Presty, I didn’t intend
to produce that impression on you.”

“What impression, Mr. Sarrazin?”

“You look as if you thought there was some excuse for the judge.”

“That’s exactly what I do think.”

“You find an excuse for him?”

“I do.”

“What is it, ma’am?”

“Constitutional infirmity, sir.”

“May I ask of what nature?”

“You may. Gout.”

Mr. Sarrazin thought he understood her at last. “You know the Lord
President,” he said.

Mrs. Presty denied it positively. “No, Mr. Sarrazin, I don’t get at it
in that way. I merely consult my experience of another official person
of high rank, and apply it to the Lord President. You know that my first
husband was a Cabinet Minister?”

“I have heard you say so, Mrs. Presty, on more than one occasion.”

“Very well. You may also have heard that the late Mr. Norman was a
remarkably well-bred man. In and out of the House of Commons, courteous
almost to a fault. One day I happened to interrupt him when he was
absorbed over an Act of Parliament. Before I could apologize--I tell you
this in the strictest confidence--he threw the Act of Parliament at
my head. Ninety-nine women out of a hundred would have thrown it back
again. Knowing his constitution, I decided on waiting a day or two. On
the second day, my anticipations were realized. Mr. Norman’s great toe
was as big as my fist and as red as a lobster; he apologized for the Act
of Parliament with tears in his eyes. Suppressed gout in Mr. Norman’s
temper; suppressed gout in the Lord President’s temper. _He_ will have a
toe; and, if I can prevail upon my daughter to call upon him, I have not
the least doubt he will apologize to her with tears in _his_ eyes.”

This interesting experiment was never destined to be tried. Right or
wrong, Mrs. Presty’s theory remained the only explanation of the judge’s
severity. Mr. Sarrazin attempted to change the subject. Mrs. Presty had
not quite done with it yet. “There is one more thing I want to say,” she
proceeded. “Will his lordship’s remarks appear in the newspapers?”

“Not a doubt of it.”

“In that case I will take care (for my daughter’s sake) that no
newspapers enter the house to-morrow. As for visitors, we needn’t be
afraid of them. Catherine is not likely to be able to leave her room;
the worry of this miserable business has quite broken her down.”

The doctor returned at that moment.

Without taking the old lady’s gloomy view of his patient, he admitted
that she was in a low nervous condition, and he had reason to suppose,
judging by her reply to a question which he had ventured to put, that
she had associations with Scotland which made a visit to that country
far from agreeable to her. His advice was that she should leave
Edinburgh as soon as possible, and go South. If the change of climate
led to no improvement, she would at least be in a position to consult
the best physicians in London. In a day or two more it would be safe to
remove her--provided she was not permitted to exhaust her strength by
taking long railway journeys.

Having given his advice, the doctor took leave. Soon after he had gone,
Kitty made her appearance, charged with a message from Mrs. Linley’s
room.

“Hasn’t the physic sent your mother to sleep yet?” Mrs. Presty inquired.

Kitty shook her head. “Mamma wants to go away tomorrow, and no physic
will make her sleep till she has seen you, and settled about it. That’s
what she told me to say. If _I_ behaved in that way about my physic, I
should catch it.”

Mrs. Presty left the room; watched by her granddaughter with an
appearance of anxiety which it was not easy to understand.

“What’s the matter?” Mr. Sarrazin asked. “You look very serious to-day.”

Kitty held up a warning hand. “Grandmamma sometimes listens at doors,”
 she whispered; “I don’t want her to hear me.” She waited a little
longer, and then approached Mr. Sarrazin, frowning mysteriously. “Take
me up on your knee,” she said. “There’s something wrong going on in this
house.”

Mr. Sarrazin took her on his knee, and rashly asked what had gone wrong.
Kitty’s reply puzzled him.

“I go to mamma’s room every morning when I wake,” the child began. “I
get into her bed, and I give her a kiss, and I say ‘Good-morning’--and
sometimes, if she isn’t in a hurry to get up, I stop in her bed, and
go to sleep again. Mamma thought I was asleep this morning. I wasn’t
asleep--I was only quiet. I don’t know why I was quiet.”

Mr. Sarrazin’s kindness still encouraged her. “Well,” he said, “and what
happened after that?”

“Grandmamma came in. She told mamma to keep up her spirits. She says,
‘It will all be over in a few hours more.’ She says, ‘What a burden
it will be off your mind!’ She says, ‘Is that child asleep?’ And mamma
says, ‘Yes.’ And grandmamma took one of mamma’s towels. And I thought
she was going to wash herself. What would _you_ have thought?”

Mr. Sarrazin began to doubt whether he would do well to discuss Mrs.
Presty’s object in taking the towel. He only said, “Go on.”

“Grandmamma dipped it into the water-jug,” Kitty continued, with a grave
face; “but she didn’t wash herself. She went to one of mamma’s boxes.
Though she’s so old, she’s awfully strong, I can tell you. She rubbed
off the luggage-label in no time. Mamma says, ‘What are you doing that
for?’ And grandmamma says--this is the dreadful thing that I want you
to explain; oh, I can remember it all; it’s like learning lessons, only
much nicer--grandmamma says, ‘Before the day’s over, the name on your
boxes will be your name no longer.’”

Mr. Sarrazin now became aware of the labyrinth into which his young
friend had innocently led him. The Divorce, and the wife’s inevitable
return (when the husband was no longer the husband) to her maiden
name--these were the subjects on which Kitty’s desire for enlightenment
applied to the wisest person within her reach, her mother’s legal
adviser.

Mr. Sarrazin tried to put her off his knee. She held him round the neck.
He thought of the railway as a promising excuse, and told her he must go
back to London. She held him a little tighter. “I really can’t wait, my
dear;” he got up as he said it. Kitty hung on to him with her legs
as well as her arms, and finding the position uncomfortable, lost her
temper. “Mamma’s going to have a new name,” she shouted, as if the
lawyer had suddenly become deaf. “Grandmamma says she must be Mrs.
Norman. And I must be Miss Norman. I won’t! Where’s papa? I want to
write to him; I know he won’t allow it. Do you hear? Where’s papa?”

She fastened her little hands on Mr. Sarrazin’s coat collar and tried
to shake him, in a fury of resolution to know what it all meant. At that
critical moment Mrs. Presty opened the door, and stood petrified on the
threshold.

“Hanging on to Mr. Sarrazin with her arms _and_ her legs!” exclaimed the
old lady. “You little wretch, which are you, a monkey or a child?”

The lawyer gently deposited Kitty on the floor.

“Mind this, Samuel,” she whispered, as he set her down on her feet, “I
won’t be Miss Norman.”

Mrs. Presty pointed sternly at the open door. “You were screaming just
now, when quiet in the house is of the utmost importance to your mother.
If I hear you again, bread and water and no doll for the rest of the
week.”

Kitty retired in disgrace, and Mrs. Presty sharpened her tongue on Mr.
Sarrazin next. “I’m astonished, sir, at your allowing that impudent
grandchild of mine to take such liberties with you. Who would suppose
that you were a married man, with children of your own?”

“That’s just the reason, my dear madam,” Mr. Sarrazin smartly replied.
“I romp with my own children--why not with Kitty? Can I do anything
for you in London?” he went on, getting a little nearer to the door; “I
leave Edinburgh by the next train. And I promise you,” he added, with
the spirit of mischief twinkling in his eyes, “this shall be my last
confidential interview with your grandchild. When she wants to ask any
more questions, I transfer her to you.”

Mrs. Presty looked after the retreating lawyer thoroughly mystified.
What “confidential interview”? What “questions”? After some
consideration, her experience of her granddaughter suggested that a
little exercise of mercy might be attended with the right result. She
looked at a cake on the sideboard. “I have only to forgive Kitty,” she
decided, “and the child will talk about it of her own accord.”



Chapter XXXI.

Mr. Herbert Linley.

Of the friends and neighbors who had associated with Herbert Linley, in
bygone days, not more than two or three kept up their intimacy with him
at the later time of his disgrace. Those few, it is needless to say,
were men.

One of the faithful companions, who had not shrunk from him yet, had
just left the London hotel at which Linley had taken rooms for Sydney
Westerfield and himself--in the name of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert. This
old friend had been shocked by the change for the worse which he had
perceived in the fugitive master of Mount Morven. Linley’s stout figure
of former times had fallen away, as if he had suffered under long
illness; his healthy color had faded; he made an effort to assume
the hearty manner that had once been natural to him which was simply
pitiable to see. “After sacrificing all that makes life truly decent
and truly enjoyable for a woman, he has got nothing, not even false
happiness, in return!” With that dreary conclusion the retiring visitor
descended the hotel steps, and went his way along the street.

Linley returned to the newspaper which he had been reading when his
friend was shown into the room.

Line by line he followed the progress of the law report, which informed
its thousands of readers that his wife had divorced him, and had taken
lawful possession of his child. Word by word, he dwelt with morbid
attention on the terms of crushing severity in which the Lord President
had spoken of Sydney Westerfield and of himself. Sentence by sentence
he read the reproof inflicted on the unhappy woman whom he had vowed to
love and cherish. And then--even then--urged by his own self-tormenting
suspicion, he looked for more. On the opposite page there was a leading
article, presenting comments on the trial, written in the tone of lofty
and virtuous regret; taking the wife’s side against the judge, but
declaring, at the same time, that no condemnation of the conduct of the
husband and the governess could be too merciless, and no misery that
might overtake them in the future more than they had deserved.

He threw the newspaper on the table at his side, and thought over what
he had read.

If he had done nothing else, he had drained the bitter cup to the dregs.
When he looked back, he saw nothing but the life that he had wasted.
When his thoughts turned to the future, they confronted a prospect empty
of all promise to a man still in the prime of life. Wife and child
were as completely lost to him as if they had been dead--and it was the
wife’s doing. Had he any right to complain? Not the shadow of a right.
As the newspapers said, he had deserved it.

The clock roused him, striking the hour.

He rose hurriedly, and advanced toward the window. As he crossed the
room, he passed by a mirror. His own sullen despair looked at him in the
reflection of his face. “She will be back directly,” he remembered; “she
mustn’t see me like this!” He went on to the window to divert his mind
(and so to clear his face) by watching the stream of life flowing by
in the busy street. Artificial cheerfulness, assumed love in Sydney’s
presence--that was what his life had come to already.

If he had known that she had gone out, seeking a temporary separation,
with _his_ fear of self-betrayal--if he had suspected that she, too, had
thoughts which must be concealed: sad forebodings of losing her hold on
his heart, terrifying suspicions that he was already comparing her, to
her own disadvantage, with the wife whom he had deserted--if he had made
these discoveries, what would the end have been? But she had, thus far,
escaped the danger of exciting his distrust. That she loved him, he
knew. That she had begun to doubt his attachment to her he would
not have believed, if his oldest friend had declared it on the best
evidence. She had said to him, that morning, at breakfast: “There was
a good woman who used to let lodgings here in London, and who was very
kind to me when I was a child;” and she had asked leave to go to the
house, and inquire if that friendly landlady was still living--with
nothing visibly constrained in her smile, and with no faltering tone in
her voice. It was not until she was out in the street that the tell-tale
tears came into her eyes, and the bitter sigh broke from her, and
mingled its little unheard misery with the grand rise and fall of the
tumult of London life. While he was still at the window, he saw her
crossing the street on her way back to him. She came into the room with
her complexion heightened by exercise; she kissed him, and said with her
pretty smile: “Have you been lonely without me?” Who would have supposed
that the torment of distrust, and the dread of desertion, were busy at
this woman’s heart?

He placed a chair for her, and seating himself by her side asked if she
felt tired. Every attention that she could wish for from the man whom
she loved, offered with every appearance of sincerity on the surface!
She met him halfway, and answered as if her mind was quite at ease.

“No, dear, I’m not tired--but I’m glad to get back.”

“Did you find your old landlady still alive?”

“Yes. But oh, so altered, poor thing! The struggle for life must have
been a hard one, since I last saw her.”

“She didn’t recognize you, of course?”

“Oh! no. She looked at me and my dress in great surprise and said her
lodgings were hardly fit for a young lady like me. It was too sad. I
said I had known her lodgings well, many years ago--and, with that to
prepare her, I told her who I was. Ah, it was a melancholy meeting for
both of us. She burst out crying when I kissed her; and I had to tell
her that my mother was dead, and my brother lost to me in spite of every
effort to find him. I asked to go into the kitchen, thinking the change
would be a relief to both of us. The kitchen used to be a paradise to me
in those old days; it was so warm to a half-starved child--and I always
got something to eat when I was there. You have no idea, Herbert, how
poor and how empty the place looked to me now. I was glad to get out of
it, and go upstairs. There was a lumber-room at the top of the house;
I used to play in it, all by myself. More changes met me the moment I
opened the door.”

“Changes for the better?”

“My dear, it couldn’t have changed for the worse! My dirty old play-room
was cleaned and repaired; the lumber taken away, and a nice little bed
in one corner. Some clerk in the City had taken the room--I shouldn’t
have known it again. But there was another surprise waiting for me; a
happy surprise this time. In cleaning out the garret, what do you think
the landlady found? Try to guess.”

Anything to please her! Anything to make her think that he was as fond
of her as ever! “Was it something you had left behind you,” he said, “at
the time when you lodged there.”

“Yes! you are right at the first guess--a little memorial of my father.
Only some torn crumpled leaves from a book of children’s songs that he
used to teach me to sing; and a small packet of his letters, which my
mother may have thrown aside and forgotten. See! I have brought them
back with me; I mean to look over the letters at once--but this doesn’t
interest you?”

“Indeed it does.”

He made that considerate reply mechanically, as if thinking of something
else. She was afraid to tell him plainly that she saw this; but she
could venture to say that he was not looking well. “I have noticed it
for some time past,” she confessed. “You have been accustomed to live in
the country; I am afraid London doesn’t agree with you.”

He admitted that she might be right; still speaking absently, still
thinking of the Divorce. She laid the packet of letters and the poor
relics of the old song-book on the table, and bent over him. Tenderly,
and a little timidly, she put her arm around his neck. “Let us try some
purer air,” she suggested; “the seaside might do you good. Don’t you
think so?”

“I daresay, my dear. Where shall we go?”

“Oh, I leave that to you.”

“No, Sydney. It was I who proposed coming to London. You shall decide
this time.”

She submitted, and promised to think of it. Leaving him, with the first
expression of trouble that had shown itself in her face, she took up
the songs and put them into the pocket of her dress. On the point of
removing the letters next, she noticed the newspaper on the table.
“Anything interesting to-day?” she asked--and drew the newspaper toward
her to look at it. He took it from her suddenly, almost roughly. The
next moment he apologized for his rudeness. “There is nothing worth
reading in the paper,” he said, after begging her pardon. “You don’t
care about politics, do you?”

Instead of answering, she looked at him attentively.

The heightened color which told of recent exercise, healthily enjoyed,
faded from her face. She was silent; she was pale. A little confused, he
smiled uneasily. “Surely,” he resumed, trying to speak gayly, “I haven’t
offended you?”

“There is something in the newspaper,” she said, “which you don’t want
me to read.”

He denied it--but he still kept the newspaper in his own possession. Her
voice sank low; her face turned paler still.

“Is it all over?” she asked. “And is it put in the newspaper?”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean the Divorce.”

He went back again to the window and looked out. It was the easiest
excuse that he could devise for keeping his face turned away from her.
She followed him.

“I don’t want to read it, Herbert. I only ask you to tell me if you are
a free man again.”

Quiet as it was, her tone left him no alternative but to treat her
brutally or to reply. Still looking out at the street, he said “Yes.”

“Free to marry, if you like?” she persisted.

He said “Yes” once more--and kept his face steadily turned away from
her. She waited a while. He neither moved nor spoke.

Surviving the slow death little by little of all her other illusions,
one last hope had lingered in her heart. It was killed by that cruel
look, fixed on the view of the street.

“I’ll try to think of a place that we can go to at the seaside.” Having
said those words she slowly moved away to the door, and turned back,
remembering the packet of letters. She took it up, paused, and looked
toward the window. The streets still interested him. She left the room.




Chapter XXXII. Miss Westerfield.


She locked the door of her bedchamber, and threw off her walking-dress;
light as it was, she felt as if it would stifle her. Even the ribbon
round her neck was more than she could endure and breathe freely. Her
overburdened heart found no relief in tears. In the solitude of her room
she thought of the future. The dreary foreboding of what it might be,
filled her with a superstitious dread from which she recoiled. One of
the windows was open already; she threw up the other to get more air. In
the cooler atmosphere her memory recovered itself; she recollected the
newspaper, that Herbert had taken from her. Instantly she rang for the
maid. “Ask the first waiter you see downstairs for today’s newspaper;
any one will do, so long as I don’t wait for it.” The report of the
Divorce--she was in a frenzy of impatience to read what _he_ had
read--the report of the Divorce.

When her wish had been gratified, when she had read it from beginning to
end, one vivid impression only was left on her mind. She could think of
nothing but what the judge had said, in speaking of Mrs. Linley.

A cruel reproof, and worse than cruel, a public reproof, administered
to the generous friend, the true wife, the devoted mother--and for
what? For having been too ready to forgive the wretch who had taken
her husband from her, and had repaid a hundred acts of kindness by
unpardonable ingratitude.

She fell on her knees; she tried wildly to pray for inspiration that
should tell her what to do. “Oh, God, how can I give that woman back the
happiness of which I have robbed her!”

The composing influence of prayer on a troubled mind was something that
she had heard of. It was not something that she experienced now. An
overpowering impatience to make the speediest and completest atonement
possessed her. Must she wait till Herbert Linley no longer concealed
that he was weary of her, and cast her off? No! It should be her own act
that parted them, and that did it at once. She threw open the door, and
hurried half-way down the stairs before she remembered the one terrible
obstacle in her way--the Divorce.

Slowly and sadly she submitted, and went back to her room.

There was no disguising it; the two who had once been husband and wife
were parted irrevocably--by the wife’s own act. Let him repent ever so
sincerely, let him be ever so ready to return, would the woman whose
faith Herbert Linley had betrayed take him back? The Divorce, the
merciless Divorce, answered:--No!

She paused, thinking of the marriage that was now a marriage no more.
The toilet-table was close to her; she looked absently at her haggard
face in the glass. What a lost wretch she saw! The generous impulses
which other women were free to feel were forbidden luxuries to her. She
was ashamed of her wickedness; she was eager to sacrifice herself, for
the good of the once-dear friend whom she had wronged. Useless longings!
Too late! too late!

She regretted it bitterly. Why?

Comparing Mrs. Linley’s prospects with hers, was there anything to
justify regret for the divorced wife? She had her sweet little child to
make her happy; she had a fortune of her own to lift her above sordid
cares; she was still handsome, still a woman to be admired. While she
held her place in the world as high as ever, what was the prospect
before Sydney Westerfield? The miserable sinner would end as she had
deserved to end. Absolutely dependent on a man who was at that moment
perhaps lamenting the wife whom he had deserted and lost, how long would
it be before she found herself an outcast, without a friend to help
her--with a reputation hopelessly lost--face to face with the temptation
to drown herself or poison herself, as other women had drowned
themselves or poisoned themselves, when the brightest future before them
was rest in death?

If she had been a few years older, Herbert Linley might never again have
seen her a living creature. But she was too young to follow any train of
repellent thought persistently to its end. The man she had guiltily (and
yet how naturally) loved was lord and master in her heart, doubt him as
she might. Even in his absence he pleaded with her to have some faith in
him still.

She reviewed his language and his conduct toward her, when she had
returned that morning from her walk. He had been kind and considerate;
he had listened to her little story of the relics of her father, found
in the garret, as if her interests were his interests. There had been
nothing to disappoint her, nothing to complain of, until she had rashly
attempted to discover whether he was free to make her his wife. She had
only herself to blame if he was cold and distant when she had alluded
to that delicate subject, on the day when he first knew that the Divorce
had been granted and his child had been taken from him. And yet, he
might have found a kinder way of reproving a sensitive woman than
looking into the street--as if he had forgotten her in the interest of
watching the strangers passing by! Perhaps he was not thinking of the
strangers; perhaps his mind was dwelling fondly and regretfully on his
wife?

Instinctively, she felt that her thoughts were leading her back again to
a state of doubt from which her youthful hopefulness recoiled. Was there
nothing she could find to do which would offer some other subject to
occupy her mind than herself and her future?

Looking absently round the room, she noticed the packet of her father’s
letters placed on the table by her bedside.

The first three letters that she examined, after untying the packet,
were briefly written, and were signed by names unknown to her. They all
related to race-horses, and to cunningly devised bets which were certain
to make the fortunes of the clever gamblers on the turf who laid them.
Absolute indifference on the part of the winners to the ruin of the
losers, who were not in the secret, was the one feeling in common, which
her father’s correspondents presented. In mercy to his memory she threw
the letters into the empty fireplace, and destroyed them by burning.

The next letter which she picked out from the little heap was of some
length, and was written in a clear and steady hand. By comparison with
the blotted scrawls which she had just burned, it looked like the letter
of a gentleman. She turned to the signature. The strange surname struck
her; it was “Bennydeck.”

Not a common name, and not a name which seemed to be altogether unknown
to her. Had she heard her father mention it at home in the time of her
early childhood? There were no associations with it that she could now
call to mind.

She read the letter. It addressed her father familiarly as “My dear
Roderick,” and it proceeded in these words:--



“The delay in the sailing of your ship offers me an opportunity of
writing to you again. My last letter told you of my father’s death. I
was then quite unprepared for an event which has happened, since that
affliction befell me. Prepare yourself to be surprised. Our old moated
house at Sandyseal, in which we have spent so many happy holidays when
we were schoolfellows, is sold.

“You will be almost as sorry as I was to hear this; and you will be
quite as surprised as I was, when I tell you that Sandyseal Place has
become a Priory of English Nuns, of the order of St. Benedict.

“I think I see you look up from my letter, with your big black eyes
staring straight before you, and say and swear that this must be one
of my mystifications. Unfortunately (for I am fond of the old house in
which I was born) it is only too true. The instructions in my father’s
will, under which Sandyseal has been sold, are peremptory. They are the
result of a promise made, many years since, to his wife.

“You and I were both very young when my poor mother died; but I think
you must remember that she, like the rest of her family, was a Roman
Catholic.

“Having reminded you of this, I may next tell you that Sandyseal Place
was my mother’s property. It formed part of her marriage portion, and
it was settled on my father if she died before him, and if she left
no female child to survive her. I am her only child. My father was
therefore dealing with his own property when he ordered the house to be
sold. His will leaves the purchase money to me. I would rather have kept
the house.

“But why did my mother make him promise to sell the place at his death?

“A letter, attached to my father’s will, answers this question, and
tells a very sad story. In deference to my mother’s wishes it was kept
strictly a secret from me while my father lived.

“There was a younger sister of my mother’s who was the beauty of the
family; loved and admired by everybody who was acquainted with her. It
is needless to make this long letter longer by dwelling on the girl’s
miserable story. You have heard it of other girls, over and over
again. She loved and trusted; she was deceived and deserted. Alone and
friendless in a foreign country; her fair fame blemished; her hope in
the future utterly destroyed, she attempted to drown herself. This took
place in France. The best of good women--a Sister of Charity--happened
to be near enough to the river to rescue her. She was sheltered; she was
pitied; she was encouraged to return to her family. The poor deserted
creature absolutely refused; she could never forget that she had
disgraced them. The good Sister of Charity won her confidence. A retreat
which would hide her from the world, and devote her to religion for the
rest of her days, was the one end to her wasted life that she longed
for. That end was attained in a Priory of Benedictine Nuns, established
in France. There she found protection and peace--there she passed the
remaining years of her life among devoted Sister-friends--and there she
died a quiet and even a happy death.

“You will now understand how my mother’s grateful remembrance associated
her with the interests of more than one community of Nuns; and you will
not need to be told what she had in mind when she obtained my father’s
promise at the time of her last illness.

“He at once proposed to bequeath the house as a free gift to the
Benedictines. My mother thanked him and refused. She was thinking of me.
‘If our son fails to inherit the house from his father,’ she said, ‘it
is only right that he should have the value of the house in money. Let
it be sold.’

“So here I am--rich already--with this additional sum of money in my
banker’s care.

“My idea is to invest it in the Funds, and to let it thrive at interest,
until I grow older, and retire perhaps from service in the Navy.
The later years of my life may well be devoted to the founding of a
charitable institution, which I myself can establish and direct. If
I die first--oh, there is a chance of it! We may have a naval war,
perhaps, or I may turn out one of those incorrigible madmen who risk
their lives in Arctic exploration. In case of the worst, therefore, I
shall leave the interests of my contemplated Home in your honest and
capable hands. For the present good-by, and a prosperous voyage outward
bound.”



So the letter ended.

Sydney dwelt with reluctant attention on the latter half of it. The
story of the unhappy favorite of the family had its own melancholy and
sinister interest for her. She felt the foreboding that it might, in
some of its circumstances, be her story too--without the peaceful end.
Into what community of merciful women could _she_ be received, in her
sorest need? What religious consolations would encourage her penitence?
What prayers, what hopes, would reconcile her, on her death-bed, to the
common doom?

She sighed as she folded up Captain Bennydeck’s letter and put it in her
bosom, to be read again. “If my lot had fallen among good people,” she
thought, “perhaps I might have belonged to the Church which took care of
that poor girl.”

Her mind was still pursuing its own sad course of inquiry; she was
wondering in what part of England Sandyseal might be; she was asking
herself if the Nuns at the old moated house ever opened their doors to
women, whose one claim on their common Christianity was the claim to be
pitied--when she heard Linley’s footsteps approaching the door.

His tone was kind; his manner was gentle; his tender interest in her
seemed to have revived. Her long absence had alarmed him; he feared she
might be ill. “I was only thinking,” she said. He smiled, and sat down
by her, and asked if she had been thinking of the place that they should
go to when they left London.




Chapter XXXIII. Mrs. Romsey.


The one hotel in Sandyseal was full, from the topmost story to the
ground floor; and by far the larger half of the landlord’s guests were
invalids sent to him by the doctors.

To persons of excitable temperament, in search of amusement, the place
offered no attractions. Situated at the innermost end of a dull little
bay, Sandyseal--so far as any view of the shipping in the Channel was
concerned--might have been built on a remote island in the Pacific
Ocean. Vessels of any importance kept well out of the way of treacherous
shoals and currents lurking at the entrance of the bay. The anchorage
ground was good; but the depth of water was suited to small vessels
only--to shabby old fishing-smacks which seldom paid their expenses, and
to dirty little coasters carrying coals and potatoes. At the back of the
hotel, two slovenly rows of cottages took their crooked course inland.
Sailing masters of yachts, off duty, sat and yawned at the windows; lazy
fishermen looked wearily at the weather over their garden gates; and
superfluous coastguards gathered together in a wooden observatory, and
leveled useless telescopes at an empty sea. The flat open country, with
its few dwarf trees and its mangy hedges, lay prostrate under the sky
in all the desolation of solitary space, and left the famous restorative
air free to build up dilapidated nerves, without an object to hinder its
passage at any point of the compass. The lonely drab-colored road that
led to the nearest town offered to visitors, taking airings, a view of
a low brown object in the distance, said to be the convent in which the
Nuns lived, secluded from mortal eyes. At one side of the hotel, the
windows looked on a little wooden pier, sadly in want of repair. On the
other side, a walled inclosure accommodated yachts of light tonnage,
stripped of their rigging, and sitting solitary on a bank of mud
until their owners wanted them. In this neighborhood there was a small
outlying colony of shops: one that sold fruit and fish; one that
dealt in groceries and tobacco; one shut up, with a bill in the window
inviting a tenant; and one, behind the Methodist Chapel, answering the
double purpose of a post-office and a storehouse for ropes and coals.
Beyond these objects there was nothing (and this was the great charm of
the place) to distract the attention of invalids, following the doctor’s
directions, and from morning to night taking care of their health.



The time was evening; the scene was one of the private sitting-rooms in
the hotel; and the purpose in view was a little tea-party.

Rich Mrs. Romsey, connected with commerce as wife of the chief partner
in the firm of Romsey & Renshaw, was staying at the hotel in the
interests of her three children. They were of delicate constitution;
their complete recovery, after severe illness which had passed from one
to the other, was less speedy than had been anticipated; and the doctor
had declared that the nervous system was, in each case, more or less in
need of repair. To arrive at this conclusion, and to recommend a visit
to Sandyseal, were events which followed each other (medically speaking)
as a matter of course.

The health of the children had greatly improved; the famous air had
agreed with them, and the discovery of new playfellows had agreed with
them. They had made acquaintance with Lady Myrie’s well-bred boys, and
with Mrs. Norman’s charming little Kitty. The most cordial good-feeling
had established itself among the mothers. Owing a return for
hospitalities received from Lady Myrie and Mrs. Norman, Mrs. Romsey had
invited the two ladies to drink tea with her in honor of an interesting
domestic event. Her husband, absent on the Continent for some time past,
on business connected with his firm, had returned to England, and had
that evening joined his wife and children at Sandyseal.

Lady Myrie had arrived, and Mr. Romsey had been presented to her. Mrs.
Norman, expected to follow, was represented by a courteous note of
apology. She was not well that evening, and she begged to be excused.

“This is a great disappointment,” Mrs. Romsey said to her husband. “You
would have been charmed with Mrs. Norman--highly-bred, accomplished, a
perfect lady. And she leaves us to-morrow. The departure will not be an
early one; and I shall find an opportunity, my dear, of introducing you
to my friend and her sweet little Kitty.”

Mr. Romsey looked interested for a moment, when he first heard Mrs.
Norman’s name. After that, he slowly stirred his tea, and seemed to be
thinking, instead of listening to his wife.

“Have you made the lady’s acquaintance here?” he inquired.

“Yes--and I hope I have made a friend for life,” Mrs. Romsey said with
enthusiasm.

“And so do I,” Lady Myrie added.

Mr. Romsey went on with his inquiries.

“Is she a handsome woman?”

Both the ladies answered the question together. Lady Myrie described
Mrs. Norman, in one dreadful word, as “Classical.” By comparison with
this, Mrs. Romsey’s reply was intelligible. “Not even illness can spoil
her beauty!”

“Including the headache she has got to-night?” Mr. Romsey suggested.

“Don’t be ill-natured, dear! Mrs. Norman is here by the advice of one of
the first physicians in London; she has suffered under serious troubles,
poor thing.”

Mr. Romsey persisted in being ill-natured. “Connected with her husband?”
 he asked.

Lady Myrie entered a protest. She was a widow; and it was notorious
among her friends that the death of her husband had been the happiest
event in her married life. But she understood her duty to herself as a
respectable woman.

“I think, Mr. Romsey, you might have spared that cruel allusion,” she
said with dignity.

Mr. Romsey apologized. He had his reasons for wishing to know something
more about Mrs. Norman; he proposed to withdraw his last remark, and to
put his inquiries under another form. Might he ask his wife if anybody
had seen _Mr._ Norman?

“No.”

“Or heard of him?”

Mrs. Romsey answered in the negative once more, and added a question on
her own account. What did all this mean?

“It means,” Lady Myrie interposed, “what we poor women are all exposed
to--scandal.” She had not yet forgiven Mr. Romsey’s allusion, and she
looked at him pointedly as she spoke. There are some impenetrable men on
whom looks produce no impression. Mr. Romsey was one of them. He turned
to his wife, and said, quietly: “What I mean is, that I know more of
Mrs. Norman than you do. I have heard of her--never mind how or where.
She is a lady who has been celebrated in the newspapers. Don’t be
alarmed. She is no less a person than the divorced Mrs. Linley.”

The two ladies looked at each other in blank dismay. Restrained by a
sense of conjugal duty, Mrs. Romsey only indulged in an exclamation.
Lady Myrie, independent of restraint, expressed her opinion, and said:
“Quite impossible!”

“The Mrs. Norman whom I mean,” Mr. Romsey went on, “has, as I have been
told, a mother living. The old lady has been twice married. Her name is
Mrs. Presty.”

This settled the question. Mrs. Presty was established, in her own
proper person, with her daughter and grandchild at the hotel. Lady Myrie
yielded to the force of evidence; she lifted her hands in horror: “This
is too dreadful!”

Mrs. Romsey took a more compassionate view of the disclosure. “Surely
the poor lady is to be pitied?” she gently suggested.

Lady Myrie looked at her friend in astonishment. “My dear, you must have
forgotten what the judge said about her. Surely you read the report of
the case in the newspapers?”

“No; I heard of the trial, and that’s all. What did the judge say?”

“Say?” Lady Myrie repeated. “What did he not say! His lordship declared
that he had a great mind not to grant the Divorce at all. He spoke of
this dreadful woman who has deceived us in the severest terms; he
said she had behaved in a most improper manner. She had encouraged the
abominable governess; and if her husband had yielded to temptation, it
was her fault. And more besides, that I don’t remember.”

Mr. Romsey’s wife appealed to him in despair. “What am I to do?” she
asked, helplessly.

“Do nothing,” was the wise reply. “Didn’t you say she was going away
to-morrow?”

“That’s the worst of it!” Mrs. Romsey declared. “Her little girl Kitty
gives a farewell dinner to-morrow to our children; and I’ve promised to
take them to say good-by.”

Lady Myrie pronounced sentence without hesitation. “Of course your girls
mustn’t go. Daughters! Think of their reputations when they grow up!”

“Are you in the same scrape with my wife?” Mr. Romsey asked.

Lady Myrie corrected his language. “I have been deceived in the same
way,” she said. “Though my children are boys (which perhaps makes a
difference) I feel it is my duty as a mother not to let them get into
bad company. I do nothing myself in an underhand way. No excuses! I
shall send a note and tell Mrs. Norman why she doesn’t see my boys
to-morrow.”

“Isn’t that a little hard on her?” said merciful Mrs. Romsey.

Mr. Romsey agreed with his wife, on grounds of expediency. “Never make
a row if you can help it,” was the peaceable principle to which this
gentleman committed himself. “Send word that the children have caught
colds, and get over it in that way.”

Mrs. Romsey looked gratefully at her admirable husband. “Just the
thing!” she said, with an air of relief.

Lady Myrie’s sense of duty expressed itself, with the strictest
adherence to the laws of courtesy. She rose, smiled resignedly, and
said, “Good-night.”

Almost at the same moment, innocent little Kitty astonished her mother
and her grandmother by appearing before them in her night-gown, after
she had been put to bed nearly two hours since.

“What will this child do next?” Mrs. Presty exclaimed.

Kitty told the truth. “I can’t go to sleep, grandmamma.”

“Why not, my darling?” her mother asked.

“I’m so excited, mamma.”

“About what, Kitty?”

“About my dinner-party to-morrow. Oh,” said the child, clasping her
hands earnestly as she thought of her playfellows, “I do so hope it will
go off well!”




Chapter XXXIV. Mrs. Presty.


Belonging to the generation which has lived to see the Age of Hurry,
and has no sympathy with it, Mrs. Presty entered the sitting-room at
the hotel, two hours before the time that had been fixed for leaving
Sandyseal, with her mind at ease on the subject of her luggage. “My
boxes are locked, strapped and labeled; I hate being hurried. What’s
that you’re reading?” she asked, discovering a book on her daughter’s
lap, and a hasty action on her daughter’s part, which looked like trying
to hide it.

Mrs. Norman made the most common, and--where the object is to baffle
curiosity--the most useless of prevaricating replies. When her mother
asked her what she was reading she answered: “Nothing.”

“Nothing!” Mrs. Presty repeated with an ironical assumption of interest.
“The work of all others, Catherine, that I most want to read.” She
snatched up the book; opened it at the first page, and discovered
an inscription in faded ink which roused her indignation. “To dear
Catherine, from Herbert, on the anniversary of our marriage.” What
unintended mockery in those words, read by the later light of the
Divorce! “Well, this is mean,” said Mrs. Presty. “Keeping that wretch’s
present, after the public exposure which he has forced on you. Oh,
Catherine!”

Catherine was not quite so patient with her mother as usual. “Keeping my
best remembrance of the happy time of my life,” she answered.

“Misplaced sentiment,” Mrs. Presty declared; “I shall put the book out
of the way. Your brain is softening, my dear, under the influence of
this stupefying place.”

Catherine asserted her own opinion against her mother’s opinion, for
the second time. “I have recovered my health at Sandyseal,” she said. “I
like the place, and I am sorry to leave it.”

“Give me the shop windows, the streets, the life, the racket, and the
smoke of London,” cried Mrs. Presty. “Thank Heaven, these rooms are let
over our heads, and out we must go, whether we like it or not.”

This expression of gratitude was followed by a knock at the door, and
by a voice outside asking leave to come in, which was, beyond all
doubt, the voice of Randal Linley. With Catherine’s book still in her
possession, Mrs. Presty opened the table-drawer, threw it in, and closed
the drawer with a bang. Discovering the two ladies, Randal stopped in
the doorway, and stared at them in astonishment.

“Didn’t you expect to see us?” Mrs. Presty inquired.

“I heard you were here, from our friend Sarrazin,” Randal said; “but I
expected to see Captain Bennydeck. Have I mistaken the number? Surely
these are his rooms?”

Catherine attempted to explain. “They _were_ Captain Bennydeck’s rooms,”
 she began; “but he was so kind, although we are perfect strangers to
him--”

Mrs. Presty interposed. “My dear Catherine, you have not had my
advantages; you have not been taught to make a complicated statement
in few words. Permit me to seize the points (in the late Mr. Presty’s
style) and to put them in the strongest light. This place, Randal, is
always full; and we didn’t write long enough beforehand to secure rooms.
Captain Bennydeck happened to be downstairs when he heard that we were
obliged to go away, and that one of us was a lady in delicate health.
This sweetest of men sent us word that we were welcome to take his
rooms, and that he would sleep on board his yacht. Conduct worthy of Sir
Charles Grandison himself. When I went downstairs to thank him, he was
gone--and here we have been for nearly three weeks; sometimes seeing the
Captain’s yacht, but, to our great surprise, never seeing the Captain
himself.”

“There’s nothing to be surprised at, Mrs. Presty. Captain Bennydeck
likes doing kind things, and hates being thanked for it. I expected him
to meet me here to-day.”

Catherine went to the window. “He is coming to meet you,” she said.
“There is his yacht in the bay.”

“And in a dead calm,” Randal added, joining her. “The vessel will not
get here, before I am obliged to go away again.”

Catherine looked at him timidly. “Do I drive you away?” she asked, in
tones that faltered a little.

Randal wondered what she could possibly be thinking of and acknowledged
it in so many words.

“She is thinking of the Divorce,” Mrs. Presty explained. “You have heard
of it, of course; and perhaps you take your brother’s part?”

“I do nothing of the sort, ma’am. My brother has been in the wrong from
first to last.” He turned to Catherine. “I will stay with you as long as
I can, with the greatest pleasure,” he said earnestly and kindly. “The
truth is, I am on my way to visit some friends; and if Captain Bennydeck
had got here in time to see me, I must have gone away to the junction
to catch the next train westward, just as I am going now. I had only two
words to say to the Captain about a person in whom he is interested--and
I can say them in this way.” He wrote in pencil on one of his visiting
cards, and laid it on the table. “I shall be back in London, in a week,”
 he resumed, “and you will tell me at what address I can find you. In the
meanwhile, I miss Kitty. Where is she?”

Kitty was sent for. She entered the room looking unusually quiet and
subdued--but, discovering Randal, became herself again in a moment, and
jumped on his knee.

“Oh, Uncle Randal, I’m so glad to see you!” She checked herself, and
looked at her mother. “May I call him Uncle Randal?” she asked. “Or has
_he_ changed his name, too?”

Mrs. Presty shook a warning forefinger at her granddaughter, and
reminded Kitty that she had been told not to talk about names. Randal
saw the child’s look of bewilderment, and felt for her. “She may talk as
she pleases to me,” he said “but not to strangers. She understands that,
I am sure.”

Kitty laid her cheek fondly against her uncle’s cheek. “Everything is
changed,” she whispered. “We travel about; papa has left us, and Syd
has left us, and we have got a new name. We are Norman now. I wish I was
grown up, and old enough to understand it.”

Randal tried to reconcile her to her own happy ignorance. “You have got
your dear good mother,” he said, “and you have got me, and you have got
your toys--”

“And some nice boys and girls to play with,” cried Kitty, eagerly
following the new suggestion. “They are all coming here directly to dine
with me. You will stay and have dinner too, won’t you?”

Randal promised to dine with Kitty when they met in London. Before he
left the room he pointed to his card on the table. “Let my friend see
that message,” he said, as he went out.

The moment the door had closed on him, Mrs. Presty startled her daughter
by taking up the card and looking at what Randal had written on it.
“It isn’t a letter, Catherine; and you know how superior I am to common
prejudices.” With that defense of her proceeding, she coolly read the
message:


“I am sorry to say that I can tell you nothing more of your old friend’s
daughter as yet. I can only repeat that she neither needs nor deserves
the help that you kindly offer to her.”


Mrs. Presty laid the card down again and owned that she wished Randal
had been a little more explicit. “Who can it be?” she wondered. “Another
young hussy gone wrong?”

Kitty turned to her mother with a look of alarm. “What’s a hussy?” she
asked. “Does grandmamma mean me?” The great hotel clock in the hall
struck two, and the child’s anxieties took a new direction. “Isn’t it
time my little friends came to see me?” she said.

It was half an hour past the time. Catherine proposed to send to Lady
Myrie and Mrs. Romsey, and inquire if anything had happened to cause the
delay. As she told Kitty to ring the bell, the waiter came in with two
letters, addressed to Mrs. Norman.

Mrs. Presty had her own ideas, and drew her own conclusions. She watched
Catherine attentively. Even Kitty observed that her mother’s face
grew paler and paler as she read the letters. “You look as if you were
frightened, mamma.” There was no reply. Kitty began to feel so uneasy on
the subject of her dinner and her guests, that she actually ventured on
putting a question to her grandmother.

“Will they be long, do you think, before they come?” she asked.

The old lady’s worldly wisdom had passed, by this time from a state of
suspicion to a state of certainty. “My child,” she answered, “they won’t
come at all.”

Kitty ran to her mother, eager to inquire if what Mrs. Presty had told
her could possibly be true. Before a word had passed her lips, she
shrank back, too frightened to speak.

Never, in her little experience, had she been startled by such a look
in her mother’s face as the look that confronted her now. For the first
time Catherine saw her child trembling at the sight of her. Before that
discovery, the emotions that shook her under the insult which she had
received lost their hold. She caught Kitty up in her arms. “My darling,
my angel, it isn’t you I am thinking of. I love you!--I love you! In the
whole world there isn’t such a good child, such a sweet, lovable, pretty
child as you are. Oh, how disappointed she looks--she’s crying. Don’t
break my heart!--don’t cry!” Kitty held up her head, and cleared her
eyes with a dash of her hand. “I won’t cry, mamma.” And child as she
was, she was as good as her word. Her mother looked at her and burst
into tears.

Perversely reluctant, the better nature that was in Mrs. Presty rose to
the surface, forced to show itself. “Cry, Catherine,” she said kindly;
“it will do you good. Leave the child to me.”

With a gentleness that astonished Kitty, she led her little
granddaughter to the window, and pointed to the public walk in front
of the house. “I know what will comfort you,” the wise old woman began;
“look out of the window.” Kitty obeyed.

“I don’t see my little friends coming,” she said. Mrs. Presty still
pointed to some object on the public walk. “That’s better than nothing,
isn’t it?” she persisted. “Come with me to the maid; she shall go with
you, and take care of you.” Kitty whispered, “May I give mamma a kiss
first?” Sensible Mrs. Presty delayed the kiss for a while. “Wait till
you come back, and then you can tell your mamma what a treat you have
had.” Arrived at the door on their way out, Kitty whispered again:
“I want to say something”--“Well, what is it?”--“Will you tell the
donkey-boy to make him gallop?”--“I’ll tell the boy he shall have
sixpence if you are satisfied; and you will see what he does then.”
 Kitty looked up earnestly in her grandmother’s face. “What a pity it
is you are not always like what you are now!” she said. Mrs. Presty
actually blushed.




Chapter XXXV. Captain Bennydeck.


For some time, Catherine and her mother had been left together
undisturbed.

Mrs. Presty had read (and destroyed) the letters of Lady Myrie and Mrs.
Romsey, with the most unfeigned contempt for the writers--had repeated
what the judge had really said, as distinguished from Lady Myrie’s
malicious version of it--and had expressed her intention of giving
Catherine a word of advice, when she was sufficiently composed to profit
by it. “You have recovered your good looks, after that fit of crying,”
 Mrs. Presty admitted, “but not your good spirits. What is worrying you
now?”

“I can’t help thinking of poor Kitty.”

“My dear, the child wants nobody’s pity. She’s blowing away all her
troubles by a ride in the fresh air, on the favorite donkey that she
feeds every morning. Yes, yes, you needn’t tell me you are in a false
position; and nobody can deny that it’s shameful to make the child feel
it. Now listen to me. Properly understood, those two spiteful women
have done you a kindness. They have as good as told you how to protect
yourself in the time to come. Deceive the vile world, Catherine, as it
deserves to be deceived. Shelter yourself behind a respectable character
that will spare you these insults in the future.” In the energy of her
conviction, Mrs. Presty struck her fist on the table, and finished in
three audacious words: “Be a Widow!”

It was plainly said--and yet Catherine seemed to be at a loss to
understand what her mother meant.

“Don’t doubt about it,” Mrs. Presty went on; “do it. Think of Kitty if
you won’t think of yourself. In a few years more she will be a young
lady. She may have an offer of marriage which may be everything we
desire. Suppose her sweetheart’s family is a religious family; and
suppose your Divorce, and the judge’s remarks on it, are discovered.
What will happen then?”

“Is it possible that you are in earnest?” Catherine asked. “Have you
seriously thought of the advice that you are giving me? Setting aside
the deceit, you know as well as I do that Kitty would ask questions. Do
you think I can tell my child that her father is dead? A lie--and such a
dreadful lie as that?”

“Nonsense!” said Mrs. Presty.

“Nonsense?” Catherine repeated indignantly.

“Rank nonsense,” her mother persisted. “Hasn’t your situation forced
you to lie already? When the child asks why her father and her governess
have left us, haven’t you been obliged to invent excuses which are lies?
If the man who was once your husband isn’t as good as dead to _you_, I
should like to know what your Divorce means! My poor dear, do you think
you can go on as you are going on now? How many thousands of people
have read the newspaper account of the trial? How many hundreds of
people--interested in a handsome woman like you--will wonder why they
never see Mr. Norman? What? You will go abroad again? Go where you may,
you will attract attention; you will make an enemy of every ugly woman
who looks at you. Strain at a gnat, Catherine, and swallow a camel. It’s
only a question of time. Sooner or later you will be a Widow. Here’s the
waiter again. What does the man want now?”

The waiter answered by announcing:

“Captain Bennydeck.”

Catherine’s mother was nearer to the door than Catherine; she attracted
the Captain’s attention first. He addressed his apologies to her. “Pray
excuse me for disturbing you--”

Mrs. Presty had an eye for a handsome man, irrespective of what his age
might be. In the language of the conjurors a “magic change” appeared in
her; she became brightly agreeable in a moment.

“Oh, Captain Bennydeck, you mustn’t make excuses for coming into your
own room!”

Captain Bennydeck went on with his excuses, nevertheless. “The landlady
tells me that I have unluckily missed seeing Mr. Randal Linley, and that
he has left a message for me. I shouldn’t otherwise have ventured--”

Mrs. Presty stopped him once more. The Captain’s claim to the Captain’s
rooms was the principle on which she took her stand. She revived the
irresistible smiles which had conquered Mr. Norman and Mr. Presty. “No
ceremony, I beg and pray! You are at home here--take the easy-chair!”

Catherine advanced a few steps; it was time to stop her mother, if the
thing could be done. She felt just embarrassment enough to heighten her
color, and to show her beauty to the greatest advantage. It literally
staggered the Captain, the moment he looked at her. His customary
composure, as a well-bred man, deserted him; he bowed confusedly; he had
not a word to say. Mrs. Presty seized her opportunity, and introduced
them to each other. “My daughter Mrs. Norman--Captain Bennydeck.”
 Compassionating him under the impression that he was a shy man,
Catherine tried to set him at his ease. “I am indeed glad to have an
opportunity of thanking you,” she said, inviting him by a gesture to be
seated. “In this delightful air, I have recovered my health, and I owe
it to your kindness.”

The Captain regained his self-possession. Expressions of gratitude had
been addressed to him which, in his modest estimate of himself, he could
not feel that he had deserved.

“You little know,” he replied, “under what interested motives I have
acted. When I established myself in this hotel, I was fairly driven out
of my yacht by a guest who went sailing with me.”

Mrs. Presty became deeply interested. “Dear me, what did he do?”

Captain Bennydeck answered gravely: “He snored.”

Catherine was amused; Mrs. Presty burst out laughing; the Captain’s dry
humor asserted itself as quaintly as ever. “This is no laughing matter,”
 he resumed, looking at Catherine. “My vessel is a small one. For two
nights the awful music of my friend’s nose kept me sleepless. When I
woke him, and said, ‘Don’t snore,’ he apologized in the sweetest manner,
and began again. On the third day I anchored in the bay here, determined
to get a night’s rest on shore. A dispute about the price of these
rooms offered them to me. I sent a note of apology on board--and slept
peacefully. The next morning, my sailing master informed me that there
had been what he called ‘a little swell in the night.’ He reported the
sounds made by my friend on this occasion to have been the awful sounds
of seasickness. ‘The gentleman left the yacht, sir, the first thing this
morning,’ he said; ‘and he’s gone home by railway.’ On the day when you
happened to arrive, my cabin was my own again; and I can honestly thank
you for relieving me of my rooms. Do you make a long stay, Mrs. Norman?”

Catherine answered that they were going to London by the next train.
Seeing Randal’s card still unnoticed on the table, she handed it to the
Captain.

“Is Mr. Linley an old friend of yours?” he asked, as he took the card.

Mrs. Presty hastened to answer in the affirmative for her daughter. It
was plain that Randal had discreetly abstained from mentioning his true
connection with them. Would he preserve the same silence if the Captain
spoke of his visit to Mrs. Norman, when he and his friend met next? Mrs.
Presty’s mind might have been at ease on that subject, if she had known
how to appreciate Randal’s character and Randal’s motives. The same keen
sense of the family disgrace, which had led him to conceal from Captain
Bennydeck his brother’s illicit relations with Sydney Westerfield, had
compelled him to keep secret his former association, as brother-in-law,
with the divorced wife. Her change of name had hitherto protected her
from discovery by the Captain, and would in all probability continue to
protect her in the future. The good Bennydeck had been enjoying himself
at sea when the Divorce was granted, and when the newspapers reported
the proceedings. He rarely went to his club, and he never associated
with persons of either sex to whom gossip and scandal are as the breath
of their lives. Ignorant of these circumstances, and remembering what
had happened on that day, Mrs. Presty looked at him with some anxiety
on her daughter’s account, while he was reading the message on Randal’s
card. There was little to see. His fine face expressed a quiet sorrow,
and he sighed as he put the card back in his pocket.

An interval of silence followed. Captain Bennydeck was thinking over the
message which he had just read. Catherine and her mother were looking
at him with the same interest, inspired by very different motives.
The interview so pleasantly begun was in some danger of lapsing into
formality and embarrassment, when a new personage appeared on the scene.

Kitty had returned in triumph from her ride. “Mamma! the donkey did more
than gallop--he kicked, and I fell off. Oh, I’m not hurt!” cried the
child, seeing the alarm in her mother’s face. “Tumbling off is such a
funny sensation. It isn’t as if you fell on the ground; it’s as if the
ground came up to _you_ and said--Bump!” She had got as far as that,
when the progress of her narrative was suspended by the discovery of a
strange gentleman in the room.

The smile that brightened the captain’s face, when Kitty opened the
door, answered for him as a man who loved children. “Your little girl,
Mrs. Norman?” he said.

“Yes.”

(A common question and a common reply. Nothing worth noticing, in either
the one or the other, at the time--and yet they proved to be important
enough to turn Catherine’s life into a new course.)

In the meanwhile, Kitty had been whispering to her mother. She wanted
to know the strange gentleman’s name. The Captain heard her. “My name is
Bennydeck,” he said; “will you come to me?”

Kitty had heard the name mentioned in connection with a yacht. Like all
children, she knew a friend the moment she looked at him. “I’ve
seen your pretty boat, sir,” she said, crossing the room to Captain
Bennydeck. “Is it very nice when you go sailing?”

“If you were not going back to London, my dear, I should ask your
mamma to let me take you sailing with me. Perhaps we shall have another
opportunity.”

The Captain’s answer delighted Kitty. “Oh, yes, tomorrow or next day!”
 she suggested. “Do you know where to find me in London? Mamma, where do
I live, when I am in London?” Before her mother could answer, she hit
on a new idea. “Don’t tell me; I’ll find it for myself. It’s on
grandmamma’s boxes, and they’re in the passage.”

Captain Bennydeck’s eyes followed her, as she left the room, with
an expression of interest which more than confirmed the favorable
impression that he had already produced on Catherine. She was on the
point of asking if he was married, and had children of his own, when
Kitty came back, and declared the right address to be Buck’s Hotel,
Sydenham. “Mamma puts things down for fear of forgetting them,” she
added. “Will you put down Buck?”

The Captain took out his pocketbook, and appealed pleasantly to Mrs.
Norman. “May I follow your example?” he asked. Catherine not only
humored the little joke, but, gratefully remembering his kindness, said:
“Don’t forget, when you are in London, that Kitty’s invitation is my
invitation, too.” At the same moment, punctual Mrs. Presty looked at her
watch, and reminded her daughter that railways were not in the habit of
allowing passengers to keep them waiting. Catherine rose, and gave her
hand to the Captain at parting. Kitty improved on her mother’s form of
farewell; she gave him a kiss and whispered a little reminder of her
own: “There’s a river in London--don’t forget your boat.”

Captain Bennydeck opened the door for them, secretly wishing that he
could follow Mrs. Norman to the station and travel by the same train.

Mrs. Presty made no attempt to remind him that she was still in the
room. Where her family interests were concerned, the old lady was
capable (on very slight encouragement) of looking a long way into
the future. She was looking into the future now. The Captain’s social
position was all that could be desired; he was evidently in easy
pecuniary circumstances; he admired Catherine and Catherine’s child. If
he only proved to be a single man, Mrs. Presty’s prophetic soul, without
waiting an instant to reflect, perceived a dazzling future. Captain
Bennydeck approached to take leave. “Not just yet,” pleaded the most
agreeable of women; “my luggage was ready two hours ago. Sit down again
for a few minutes. You seem to like my little granddaughter.”

“If I had such a child as that,” the Captain answered, “I believe I
should be the happiest man living.”

“Ah, my dear sir, all isn’t gold that glitters,” Mrs. Presty remarked.
“That proverb must have been originally intended to apply to children.
May I presume to make you the subject of a guess? I fancy you are not a
married man.”

The Captain looked a little surprised. “You are quite right,” he said;
“I have never been married.”

At a later period, Mrs. Presty owned that she felt an inclination
to reward him for confessing himself to be a bachelor, by a kiss. He
innocently checked that impulse by putting a question. “Had you any
particular reason,” he asked, “for guessing that I was a single man?”

Mrs. Presty modestly acknowledged that she had only her own experience
to help her. “You wouldn’t be quite so fond of other people’s children,”
 she said, “if you were a married man. Ah, your time will come yet--I
mean your wife will come.”

He answered this sadly. “My time has gone by. I have never had the
opportunities that have been granted to some favored men.” He thought of
the favored man who had married Mrs. Norman. Was her husband worthy
of his happiness? “Is Mr. Norman with you at this place?” the Captain
asked.

Serious issues depended on the manner in which this question was
answered. For one moment, and for one moment only, Mrs. Presty
hesitated. Then (in her daughter’s interest, of course) she put
Catherine in the position of a widow, in the least blamable of all
possible ways, by honestly owning the truth.

“There is no Mr. Norman,” she said.

“Your daughter is a widow!” cried the Captain, perfectly unable to
control his delight at that discovery.

“What else should she be?” Mrs. Presty replied, facetiously.

What else, indeed! If “no Mr. Norman” meant (as it must surely mean)
that Mr. Norman was dead, and if the beautiful mother of Kitty was an
honest woman, her social position was beyond a doubt. Captain Bennydeck
felt a little ashamed of his own impetuosity. Before he had made up
his mind what to say next, the unlucky waiter (doomed to be a cause of
disturbance on that day) appeared again.

“I beg your pardon, ma’am,” he said; “the lady and gentleman who have
taken these rooms have just arrived.”

Mrs. Presty got up in a hurry, and cordially shook hands with the
Captain. Looking round, she took up the railway guide and her knitting
left on the table. Was there anything else left about? There was nothing
to be seen. Mrs. Presty crossed the passage to her daughter’s bedroom,
to hurry the packing. Captain Bennydeck went downstairs, on his way back
to the yacht.

In the hall of the hotel he passed the lady and gentleman--and, of
course, noticed the lady. She was little and dark and would have been
pretty, if she had not looked ill and out of spirits. What would he have
said, what would he have done, if he had known that those two strangers
were Randal Linley’s brother and Roderick Westerfield’s daughter?




Chapter XXXVI



Mr. and Mrs. Herbert.


The stealthy influence of distrust fastens its hold on the mind by
slow degrees. Little by little it reaches its fatal end, and disguises
delusion successfully under the garb of truth.

Day after day, the false conviction grew on Sydney’s mind that Herbert
Linley was comparing the life he led now with the happier life which
he remembered at Mount Morven. Day after day, her unreasoning fear
contemplated the time when Herbert Linley would leave her friendless,
in the world that had no place in it for women like herself.
Delusion--fatal delusion that looked like truth! Morally weak as he
might be, the man whom she feared to trust had not yet entirely lost the
sense which birth and breeding had firmly fastened in him--the sense
of honor. Acting under that influence, he was (if the expression may
be permitted) consistent even in inconsistency. With equal sincerity of
feeling, he reproached himself for his infidelity toward the woman whom
he had deserted, and devoted himself to his duty toward the woman
whom he had misled. In Sydney’s presence--suffer as he might under
the struggle to maintain his resolution when he was alone--he kept his
intercourse with her studiously gentle in manner, and considerate in
language; his conduct offered assurances for the future which she could
only see through the falsifying medium of her own distrust.

In the delusion that now possessed her she read, over and over again,
the letter which Captain Bennydeck had addressed to her father; she saw,
more and more clearly, the circumstances which associated her situation
with the situation of the poor girl who had closed her wasted life among
the nuns in a French convent.

Two results followed on this state of things.

When Herbert asked to what part of England they should go, on leaving
London, she mentioned Sandyseal as a place that she had heard of, and
felt some curiosity to see. The same day--bent on pleasing her, careless
where he lived now, at home or abroad--he wrote to engage rooms at the
hotel.

A time followed, during which they were obliged to wait until rooms were
free. In this interval, brooding over the melancholy absence of a friend
or relative in whom she could confide, her morbid dread of the future
decided her on completing the parallel between herself and that
other lost creature of whom she had read. Sydney opened communication
anonymously with the Benedictine community at Sandyseal.

She addressed the Mother Superior; telling the truth about herself with
but one concealment, the concealment of names. She revealed her isolated
position among her fellow-creatures; she declared her fervent desire to
repent of her wickedness, and to lead a religious life; she acknowledged
her misfortune in having been brought up by persons careless of
religion, and she confessed to having attended a Protestant place of
worship, as a mere matter of form connected with the duties of a teacher
at a school. “The religion of any Christian woman who will help me to
be more like herself,” she wrote, “is the religion to which I am willing
and eager to belong. If I come to you in my distress, will you receive
me?” To that simple appeal, she added a request that an answer might be
addressed to “S.W., Post-office, Sandyseal.”

When Captain Bennydeck and Sydney Westerfield passed each other as
strangers, in the hall of the hotel, that letter had been posted in
London a week since.



The servant showed “Mr. and Mrs. Herbert” into their sitting-room, and
begged that they would be so good as to wait for a few minutes, while
the other rooms were being prepared for them.

Sydney seated herself in silence. She was thinking of her letter, and
wondering whether a reply was waiting for her at the post-office.

Moving toward the window to look at the view, Herbert paused to examine
some prints hanging on the walls, which were superior as works of art to
the customary decorations of a room at a hotel. If he had gone straight
to the window he might have seen his divorced wife, his child, and his
wife’s mother, getting into the carriage which took them to the railway
station.

“Come, Sydney,” he said, “and look at the sea.”

She joined him wearily, with a faint smile. It was a calm, sunny day.
Bathing machines were on the beach; children were playing here and
there; and white sails of pleasure boats were visible in the offing. The
dullness of Sandyseal wore a quiet homely aspect which was pleasant to
the eyes of strangers. Sydney said, absently, “I think I shall like the
place.” And Herbert added: “Let us hope that the air will make you feel
stronger.” He meant it and said it kindly--but, instead of looking at
her while he spoke, he continued to look at the view. A woman sure of
her position would not have allowed this trifling circumstance, even if
she had observed it, to disturb her. Sydney thought of the day in London
when he had persisted in looking out at the street, and returned in
silence to her chair.

Had he been so unfortunate as to offend her? And in what way? As that
doubt occurred to Herbert his mind turned to Catherine. _She_ never
took offense at trifles; a word of kindness from him, no matter how
unimportant it might be, always claimed affectionate acknowledgment
in the days when he was living with his wife. In another moment he had
dismissed that remembrance, and could trust himself to return to Sydney.

“If you find that Sandyseal confirms your first impression,” he said,
“let me know it in time, so that I may make arrangements for a longer
stay. I have only taken the rooms here for a fortnight.”

“Thank you, Herbert; I think a fortnight will be long enough.”

“Long enough for you?” he asked.

Her morbid sensitiveness mistook him again; she fancied there was an
undernote of irony in his tone.

“Long enough for both of us,” she replied.

He drew a chair to her side. “Do you take it for granted,” he said,
smiling, “that I shall get tired of the place first?”

She shrank, poor creature, even from his smile. There was, as she
thought, something contemptuous in the good-humor of it.

“We have been to many places,” she reminded him, “and we have got tired
of them together.”

“Is that my fault?”

“I didn’t say it was.”

He got up and approached the bell. “I think the journey has a little
over-tired you,” he resumed. “Would you like to go to your room?”

“I will go to my room, if you wish it.”

He waited a little, and answered her as quietly as ever. “What I really
wish,” he said, “is that we had consulted a doctor while we were in
London. You seem to be very easily irritated of late. I observe a change
in you, which I willingly attribute to the state of your health--”

She interrupted him. “What change do you mean?”

“It’s quite possible I may be mistaken, Sydney. But I have more than
once, as I think, seen something in your manner which suggests that you
distrust me.”

“I distrust the evil life we are leading,” she burst out, “and I see the
end of it coming. Oh, I don’t blame you! You are kind and considerate,
you do your best to hide it; but you have lived long enough with me to
regret the woman whom you have lost. You begin to feel the sacrifice you
have made--and no wonder. Say the word, Herbert, and I release you.”

“I will never say the word!”

She hesitated--first inclined, then afraid, to believe him. “I have
grace enough left in me,” she went on, “to feel the bitterest repentance
for the wrong that I have done to Mrs. Linley. When it ends, as it must
end, in our parting, will you ask your wife--?”

Even his patience began to fail him; he refused--firmly, not angrily--to
hear more. “She is no longer my wife,” he said.

Sydney’s bitterness and Sydney’s penitence were mingled, as opposite
emotions only _can_ be mingled in a woman’s breast. “Will you ask your
wife to forgive you?” she persisted.

“After we have been divorced at her petition?” He pointed to the window
as he said it. “Look at the sea. If I was drowning out yonder, I might
as well ask the sea to forgive me.”

He produced no effect on her. She ignored the Divorce; her passionate
remorse asserted itself as obstinately as ever. “Mrs. Linley is a good
woman,” she insisted; “Mrs. Linley is a Christian woman.”

“I have lost all claim on her--even the claim to remember her virtues,”
 he answered, sternly. “No more of it, Sydney! I am sorry I have
disappointed you; I am sorry if you are weary of me.”

At those last words her manner changed. “Wound me as cruelly as you
please,” she said, humbly. “I will try to bear it.”

“I wouldn’t wound you for the world! Why do you persist in distressing
me? Why do you feel suspicion of me which I have not deserved?” He
stopped, and held out his hand. “Don’t let us quarrel, Sydney. Which
will you do? Keep your bad opinion of me, or give me a fair trial?”

She loved him dearly; she was so young--and the young are so ready to
hope! Still, she struggled against herself. “Herbert! is it your pity
for me that is speaking now?”

He left her in despair. “It’s useless!” he said, sadly. “Nothing will
conquer your inveterate distrust.”

She followed him. With a faint cry of entreaty she made him turn to her,
and held him in a trembling embrace, and rested her head on his bosom.
“Forgive me--be patient with me--love me.” That was all she could say.

He attempted to calm her agitation by speaking lightly. “At last,
Sydney, we are friends again!” he said.

Friends? All the woman in her recoiled from that insufficient word. “Are
we Lovers?” she whispered.

“Yes!”

With that assurance her anxious heart was content. She smiled; she
looked out at the sea with a new appreciation of the view. “The air of
this place will do me good now,” she said. “Are my eyes red, Herbert?
Let me go and bathe them, and make myself fit to be seen.”

She rang the bell. The chambermaid answered it, ready to show the other
rooms. She turned round at the door.

“Let’s try to make our sitting-room look like home,” she suggested.
“How dismal, how dreadfully like a thing that doesn’t belong to us, that
empty table looks! Put some of your books and my keepsakes on it, while
I am away. I’ll bring my work with me when I come back.”

He had left his travelers’ bag on a chair, when he first came in. Now
that he was alone, and under no restraint, he sighed as he unlocked
the bag. “Home?” he repeated; “we have no home. Poor girl! poor unhappy
girl! Let me help her to deceive herself.”

He opened the bag. The little fragile presents, which she called her
“keepsakes,” had been placed by her own hands in the upper part of the
bag, so that the books should not weigh on them, and had been carefully
protected by wrappings of cotton wool. Taking them out, one by one,
Herbert found a delicate china candlestick (intended to hold a wax
taper) broken into two pieces, in spite of the care that had been taken
to preserve it. Of no great value in itself, old associations made the
candlestick precious to Sydney. It had been broken at the stem and could
be easily mended so as to keep the accident concealed. Consulting the
waiter, Herbert discovered that the fracture could be repaired at the
nearest town, and that the place would be within reach when he went out
for a walk. In fear of another disaster, if he put it back in the bag,
he opened a drawer in the table, and laid the two fragments carefully
inside, at the further end. In doing this, his hand touched something
that had been already placed in the drawer. He drew it out, and found
that it was a book--the same book that Mrs. Presty (surely the evil
genius of the family again!) had hidden from Randal’s notice, and had
forgotten when she left the hotel.


Herbert instantly recognized the gilding on the cover, imitated from a
design invented by himself. He remembered the inscription, and yet he
read it again:

“To dear Catherine, from Herbert, on the anniversary of our marriage.”

The book dropped from his hand on the table, as if it had been a new
discovery, torturing him with a new pain.

His wife (he persisted in thinking of her as his wife) must have
occupied the room--might perhaps have been the person whom he had
succeeded, as a guest at the hotel. Did she still value his present to
her, in remembrance of old times? No! She valued it so little that she
had evidently forgotten it. Perhaps her maid might have included it
among the small articles of luggage when they left home, or dear little
Kitty might have put it into one of her mother’s trunks. In any case,
there it was now, abandoned in the drawer of a table at a hotel.

“Oh,” he thought bitterly, “if I could only feel as coldly toward
Catherine as she feels toward me!” His resolution had resisted much; but
this final trial of his self-control was more than he could sustain.
He dropped into a chair--his pride of manhood recoiled from the
contemptible weakness of crying--he tried to remember that she had
divorced him, and taken his child from him. In vain! in vain! He burst
into tears.




Chapter XXXVII. Mrs. Norman.


With a heart lightened by reconciliation (not the first reconciliation
unhappily), with hopes revived, and sweet content restored, Sydney’s
serenity of mind was not quite unruffled. Her thoughts were not dwelling
on the evil life which she had honestly deplored, or on the wronged wife
to whom she had been eager to make atonement. Where is the woman whose
sorrows are not thrown into the shade by the bright renewal of love? The
one anxiety that troubled Sydney was caused by remembrance of the letter
which she had sent to the convent at Sandyseal.

As her better mind now viewed it, she had doubly injured Herbert--first
in distrusting him; then by appealing from him to the compassion of
strangers.

If the reply for which she had rashly asked was waiting for her at that
moment--if the mercy of the Mother Superior was ready to comfort and
guide her--what return could she make? how could she excuse herself from
accepting what was offered in kindly reply to her own petition? She
had placed herself, for all she knew to the contrary, between two
alternatives of ingratitude equally unendurable, equally degrading.
To feel this was to feel the suspense which, to persons of excitable
temperament, is of all trials the hardest to bear. The chambermaid
was still in her room--Sydney asked if the post-office was near to the
hotel.

The woman smiled. “Everything is near us, ma’am, in this little place.
Can we send to the post-office for you?”

Sydney wrote her initials. “Ask, if you please, for a letter
addressed in that way.” She handed the memorandum to the chambermaid.
“Corresponding with her lover under her husband’s nose!” That was how
the chambermaid explained it below stairs, when the porter remarked that
initials looked mysterious.

The Mother Superior had replied. Sydney trembled as she opened the
letter. It began kindly.

“I believe you, my child, and I am anxious to help you. But I cannot
correspond with an unknown person. If you decide to reveal yourself,
it is only right to add that I have shown your letter to the Reverend
Father who, in temporal as in spiritual things, is our counselor and
guide. To him I must refer you, in the first instance. His wisdom will
decide the serious question of receiving you into our Holy Church, and
will discover, in due time, if you have a true vocation to a religious
life. With the Father’s sanction, you may be sure of my affectionate
desire to serve you.”

Sydney put the letter back in the envelope, feeling gratefully toward
the Mother Superior, but determined by the conditions imposed on her to
make no further advance toward the Benedictine community.

Even if her motive in writing to the convent had remained unchallenged,
the allusions to the priest would still have decided her on taking this
step. The bare idea of opening her inmost heart, and telling her saddest
secrets, to a man, and that man a stranger, was too repellent to be
entertained for a moment. In a few lines of reply, gratefully and
respectfully written, she thanked the Mother Superior, and withdrew from
the correspondence.

The letter having been closed, and posted in the hotel box, she returned
to the sitting-room free from the one doubt that had troubled her; eager
to show Herbert how truly she believed in him, how hopefully she looked
to the future.

With a happy smile on her lips she opened the door. She was on the
point of asking him playfully if he had felt surprised at her long
absence--when the sight that met her eyes turned her cold with terror in
an instant.

His arms were stretched out on the table; his head was laid on them,
despair confessed itself in his attitude; grief spoke in the deep
sobbing breaths that shook him. Love and compassion restored Sydney’s
courage; she advanced to raise him in her arms--and stopped once more.
The book on the table caught her eye. He was still unconscious of her
presence; she ventured to open it. She read the inscription--looked at
him--looked back at the writing--and knew the truth at last.

The rigor of the torture that she suffered paralyzed all outward
expression of pain. Quietly she put the book back on the table. Quietly
she touched him, and called him by his name.

He started and looked up; he made an attempt to speak to her in his
customary tone. “I didn’t hear you come in,” he said.

She pointed to the book, without the slightest change in her face or her
manner.

“I have read the inscription to your wife,” she answered; “I have seen
you while you thought you were alone; the mercy which has so long kept
the truth from me is mercy wasted now. Your bonds are broken, Herbert.
You are a free man.”

He affected not to have understood her. She let him try to persuade her
of it, and made no reply. He declared, honestly declared, that what she
had said distressed him. She listened in submissive silence. He took
her hand, and kissed it. She let him kiss it, and let him drop it at
her side. She frightened him; he began to fear for her reason. There was
silence--long, horrid, hopeless silence.

She had left the door of the room open. One of the servants of the hotel
appeared outside in the passage. He spoke to some person behind him.
“Perhaps the book has been left in here,” he suggested. A gentle voice
answered: “I hope the lady and gentleman will excuse me, if I ask leave
to look for my book.” She stepped into the room to make her apologies.

Herbert Linley and Sydney Westerfield looked at the woman whom they had
outraged. The woman whom they had outraged paused, and looked back at
them.

The hotel servant was surprised at their not speaking to each other.
He was a stupid man; he thought the gentlefolks were strangely unlike
gentlefolks in general; they seemed not to know what to say. Herbert
happened to be standing nearest to him; he felt that it would be civil
to the gentleman to offer a word of explanation.

“The lady had these rooms, sir. She has come back from the station to
look for a book that has been left behind.”

Herbert signed to him to go. As the man turned to obey, he drew back.
Sydney had moved to the door before him, to leave the room. Herbert
refused to permit it. “Stay here,” he said to her gently; “this room is
yours.”

Sydney hesitated. Herbert addressed her again. He pointed to his
divorced wife. “You see how that lady is looking at you,” he said; “I
beg that you will not submit to insult from anybody.”

Sydney obeyed him: she returned to the room.

Catherine’s voice was heard for the first time. She addressed herself
to Sydney with a quiet dignity--far removed from anger, further removed
still from contempt.

“You were about to leave the room,” she said. “I notice--as an act of
justice to _you_--that my presence arouses some sense of shame.”

Herbert turned to Sydney; trying to recover herself, she stood near the
table. “Give me the book,” he said; “the sooner this comes to an end
the better for her, the better for us.” Sydney gave him the book. With a
visible effort, he matched Catherine’s self-control; after all, she had
remembered his gift! He offered the book to her.

She still kept her eyes fixed on Sydney--still spoke to Sydney.

“Tell him,” she said, “that I refuse to receive the book.”

Sydney attempted to obey. At the first words she uttered, Herbert
checked her once more.

“I have begged you already not to submit to insult.” He turned to
Catherine. “The book is yours, madam. Why do you refuse to take it?”

She looked at him for the first time. A proud sense of wrong flashed at
him its keenly felt indignation in her first glance. “Your hands and
her hands have touched it,” she answered. “I leave it to _you_ and to
_her_.”

Those words stung him. “Contempt,” he said, “is bitter indeed on your
lips.”

“Do you presume to resent my contempt?”

“I forbid you to insult Miss Westerfield.” With that reply, he turned to
Sydney. “You shall not suffer while I can prevent it,” he said tenderly,
and approached to put his arm round her. She looked at Catherine, and
drew back from his embrace, gently repelling him by a gesture.

Catherine felt and respected the true delicacy, the true penitence,
expressed in that action. She advanced to Sydney. “Miss Westerfield,”
 she said, “I will take the book--from you.”

Sydney gave back the book without a word; in her position silence was
the truest gratitude. Quietly and firmly Catherine removed the blank
leaf on which Herbert had written, and laid it before him on the table.
“I return your inscription. It means nothing now.” Those words were
steadily pronounced; not the slightest appearance of temper accompanied
them. She moved slowly to the door and looked back at Sydney. “Make some
allowance for what I have suffered,” she said gently. “If I have wounded
you, I regret it.” The faint sound of her dress on the carpet was heard
in the perfect stillness, and lost again. They saw her no more.

Herbert approached Sydney. It was a moment when he was bound to assure
her of his sympathy. He felt for her. In his inmost heart he felt for
her. As he drew nearer, he saw tears in her eyes; but they seemed to
have risen without her knowledge. Hardly conscious of his presence, she
stood before him--lost in thought.

He endeavored to rouse her. “Did I protect you from insult?” he asked.

She said absently: “Yes!”

“Will you do as I do, dear? Will you try to forget?”

She said: “I will try to atone,” and moved toward the door of her
room. The reply surprised him; but it was no time then to ask for an
explanation.

“Would you like to lie down, Sydney, and rest?”

“Yes.”

She took his arm. He led her to the door of her room. “Is there anything
else I can do for you?” he asked.

“Nothing, thank you.”

She closed the door--and abruptly opened it again. “One thing more,” she
said. “Kiss me.”

He kissed her tenderly. Returning to the sitting-room, he looked back
across the passage. Her door was shut.

His head was heavy; his mind felt confused. He threw himself on the
sofa--utterly exhausted by the ordeal through which he had passed. In
grief, in fear, in pain, the time still comes when Nature claims her
rights. The wretched worn-out man fell into a restless sleep. He was
awakened by the waiter, laying the cloth for dinner. “It’s just ready,
sir,” the servant announced; “shall I knock at the lady’s door?”

Herbert got up and went to her room.

He entered softly, fearing to disturb her if she too had slept. No sign
of her was to be seen. She had evidently not rested on her bed. A morsel
of paper lay on the smooth coverlet. There was only a line written on
it: “You may yet be happy--and it may perhaps be my doing.”

He stood, looking at that last line of her writing, in the empty room.
His despair and his submission spoke in the only words that escaped him:

“I have deserved it!”




FIFTH BOOK.



Chapter XXXVIII. Hear the Lawyer.


“Mr. Herbert Linley, I ask permission to reply to your inquiries in
writing, because it is quite likely that some of the opinions you will
find here might offend you if I expressed them personally. I can relieve
your anxiety on the subject of Miss Sydney Westerfield. But I must be
allowed to do so in my own way--without any other restraints than those
which I think it becoming to an honorable man to impose on himself.

“You are quite right in supposing that Miss Westerfield had heard me
spoken of at Mount Morven, as the agent and legal adviser of the lady
who was formerly your wife. What purpose led her to apply to me, under
these circumstances, you will presently discover. As to the means
by which she found her way to my office, I may remind you that any
directory would give her the necessary information.

“Miss Westerfield’s object was to tell me, in the first place, that her
guilty life with you was at an end. She has left your protection--not to
return to it. I was sorry to see (though she tried to hide it from me)
how keenly she felt the parting. You have been dearly loved by two sweet
women, and they have thrown their hearts away on you--as women will.

“Having explained the circumstances so far, Miss Westerfield next
mentioned the motive which had brought her to my office. She asked if I
would inform her of Mrs. Norman’s address.

“This request, I confess, astonished me.

“To my mind she was, of all persons, the last who ought to contemplate
communicating in any way with Mrs. Norman. I say this to you; but I
refrained from saying it to her. What I did venture to do was to ask for
her reasons. She answered that they were reasons which would embarrass
her if she communicated them to a stranger.

“After this reply, I declined to give her the information she wanted.

“Not unprepared, as it appeared to me, for my refusal, she asked next if
I was willing to tell her where she might find your brother, Mr. Randal
Linley. In this case I was glad to comply with her request. She could
address herself to no person worthier to advise her than your brother.
In giving her his address in London, I told her that he was absent on
a visit to some friends, and that he was expected to return in a week’s
time.

“She thanked me, and rose to go.

“I confess I was interested in her. Perhaps I thought of the time when
she might have been as dear to her father as my own daughters are to
me. I asked if her parents were living: they were dead. My next
question was: ‘Have you any friends in London?’ She answered: ‘I have
no friends.’ It was said with a resignation so very sad in so young
a creature that I was really distressed. I ran the risk of offending
her--and asked if she felt any embarrassment in respect of money. She
said: ‘I have some small savings from my salary when I was a governess.’
The change in her tone told me that she was alluding to the time of her
residence at Mount Morven. It was impossible to look at this friendless
girl, and not feel some anxiety about the lodging which she might have
chosen in such a place as London. She had fortunately come to me from
the railway, and had not thought yet of where she was to live. At last
I was able to be of some use to her. My senior clerk took care of Miss
Westerfield, and left her among respectable people, in whose house she
could live cheaply and safely. Where that house is, I refuse (for her
sake) to tell you. She shall not be disturbed.

“After a week had passed I received a visit from my good friend, Randal
Linley.

“He had on that day seen Miss Westerfield. She had said to him what she
had said to me, and had repeated the request which I thought it unwise
to grant; owning to your brother, however, the motives which she had
refused to confide to me. He was so strongly impressed by the sacrifice
of herself which this penitent woman had made, that he was at first
disposed to trust her with Mrs. Norman’s address.

“Reflection, however, convinced him that her motives, pure and
disinterested as they undoubtedly were, did not justify him in letting
her expose herself to the consequences which might follow the proposed
interview. All that he engaged to do was to repeat to Mrs. Norman what
Miss Westerfield had said, and to inform the young lady of the result.

“In the intervals of business, I had felt some uneasiness when I thought
of Miss Westerfield’s prospects. Your good brother at once set all
anxiety on this subject at rest.

“He proposed to place Miss Westerfield under the care of an old and dear
friend of her late father--Captain Bennydeck. Her voluntary separation
from you offered to your brother, and to the Captain, the opportunity
for which they had both been waiting. Captain Bennydeck was then
cruising at sea in his yacht. Immediately on his return, Miss
Westerfield’s inclination would be consulted, and she would no doubt
eagerly embrace the opportunity of being introduced to her father’s
friend.

“I have now communicated all that I know, in reply to the questions
which you have addressed to me. Let me earnestly advise you to make the
one reparation to this poor girl which is in your power. Resign yourself
to a separation which is not only for her good, but for yours.--SAMUEL
SARRAZIN.”




Chapter XXXIX. Listen to Reason.


Not having heard from Captain Bennydeck for some little time, Randal
thought it desirable in Sydney’s interests to make inquiries at his
club. Nothing was known of the Captain’s movements there. On the chance
of getting the information that he wanted, Randal wrote to the hotel at
Sandyseal.

The landlord’s reply a little surprised him.

Some days since, the yacht had again appeared in the bay. Captain
Bennydeck had landed, to all appearance in fairly good health; and had
left by an early train for London. The sailing-master announced that
he had orders to take the vessel back to her port--with no other
explanation than that the cruise was over. This alternative in the
Captain’s plans (terminating the voyage a month earlier than his
arrangements had contemplated) puzzled Randal. He called at his friend’s
private residence, only to hear from the servants that they had seen
nothing of their master. Randal waited a while in London, on the chance
that Bennydeck might pay him a visit.

During this interval his patience was rewarded in an unexpected manner.
He discovered the Captain’s address by means of a letter from Catherine,
dated “Buck’s Hotel, Sydenham.” Having gently reproached him for not
writing to her or calling on her, she invited him to dinner at the
hotel. Her letter concluded in these words: “You will only meet one
person besides ourselves--your friend, and (since we last met) our
friend too. Captain Bennydeck has got tired of the sea. He is staying at
this hotel, to try the air of Sydenham, and he finds that it agrees with
him.”

These lines set Randal thinking seriously.

To represent Bennydeck as being “tired of the sea,” and as being willing
to try, in place of the breezy Channel, the air of a suburb of London,
was to make excuses too perfectly futile and absurd to deceive any one
who knew the Captain. In spite of the appearance of innocence which
pervaded Catherine’s letter, the true motive for breaking off his cruise
might be found, as Randal concluded, in Catherine herself. Her residence
at the sea-side, helped by the lapse of time, had restored to her
personal attractions almost all they had lost under the deteriorating
influences of care and grief; and her change of name must have protected
her from a discovery of the Divorce which would have shocked a man so
sincerely religious as Bennydeck. Had her beauty fascinated him? Was
she aware of the interest that he felt in her? and was it secretly
understood and returned? Randal wrote to accept the invitation;
determining to present himself before the appointed hour, and to
question Catherine privately, without giving her the advantage over him
of preparing herself for the interview.

In the short time that passed before the day of the dinner, distressing
circumstances strengthened his resolution. After months of separation,
he received a visit from Herbert.

Was this man--haggard, pallid, shabby, looking at him piteously with
bloodshot eyes--the handsome, pleasant, prosperous brother whom he
remembered? Randal was so grieved, that he was for a moment unable to
utter a word. He could only point to a seat. Herbert dropped into the
chair as if he was reduced to the last extremity of fatigue. And yet he
spoke roughly; he looked like an angry man brought to bay.

“I seem to frighten you,” he said.

“You distress me, Herbert, more than words can say.”

“Give me a glass of wine. I’ve been walking--I don’t know where. A long
distance; I’m dead beat.”

He drank the wine greedily. Whatever reviving effect it might otherwise
have produced on him, it made no change in the threatening gloom of
his manner. In a man morally weak, calamity (suffered without resisting
power) breaks its way through the surface which exhibits a gentleman,
and shows the naked nature which claims kindred with our ancestor the
savage.

“Do you feel better, Herbert?”

He put down the empty glass, taking no notice of his brother’s question.
“Randal,” he said, “you know where Sydney is.”

Randal admitted it.

“Give me her address. My mind’s in such a state I can’t remember it;
write it down.”

“No, Herbert.”

“You won’t write it? and you won’t give it?”

“I will do neither the one nor the other. Go back to your chair; fierce
looks and clinched fists don’t frighten me. Miss Westerfield is quite
right in separating herself from you. And you are quite wrong in wishing
to go back to her. There are my reasons. Try to understand them. And,
once again, sit down.”

He spoke sternly--with his heart aching for his brother all the time.
He was right. The one way is the positive way, when a man who suffers
trouble is degraded by it.

The poor wretch sank under Randal’s firm voice and steady eye.

“Don’t be hard on me,” he said. “I think a man in my situation is to be
pitied--especially by his brother. I’m not like you; I’m not accustomed
to live alone. I’ve been accustomed to having a kind woman to talk to
me, and take care of me. You don’t know what it is to be used to
seeing a pretty creature, always nicely dressed, always about the
room--thinking so much of you, and so little of herself--and then to be
left alone as I am left, out in the dark. I haven’t got my wife; she
has thrown me over, and taken my child away from me. And, now, Sydney’s
taken away from me next. I’m alone. Do you hear that? Alone! Take the
poker there out of the fireplace. Give me back Sydney, or knock out
my brains. I haven’t courage enough to do it for myself. Oh, why did I
engage that governess! I was so happy, Randal, with Catherine and little
Kitty.”

He laid his head wearily on the back of his chair. Randal offered him
more wine; he refused it.

“I’m afraid,” he said. “Wine maddens me if I take too much of it.
You have heard of men forgetting their sorrows in drink. I tried it
yesterday; it set my brains on fire; I’m feeling that glass I took just
now. No! I’m not faint. It eases my head when I rest like this. Shake
hands, Randal; we have never had any unfriendly words; we mustn’t begin
now. There’s something perverse about me. I didn’t know how fond I was
of Sydney till I lost her; I didn’t know how fond I was of my wife till
I left her.” He paused, and put his hand to his fevered head. Was his
mind wandering into some other train of thought? He astonished his
brother by a new entreaty--the last imaginable entreaty that Randal
expected to hear. “Dear old fellow, I want you to do me a favor. Tell me
where my wife is living now?”

“Surely,” Randal answered, “you know that she is no longer your wife?”

“Never mind that! I have something to say to her.”

“You can’t do it.”

“Can _you_ do it? Will you give her a message?”

“Let me hear what it is first.”

Herbert lifted his head, and laid his hand earnestly on his brother’s
arm. When he said his next words he was almost like his old self again.

“Say that I’m lonely, say that I’m dying for want of a little
comfort--ask her to let me see Kitty.”

His tone touched Randal to the quick. “I feel for you, Herbert,”
 he said, warmly. “She shall have your message; all that I can do to
persuade her shall be done.”

“As soon as possible?”

“Yes--as soon as possible.”

“And you won’t forget? No, no; of course you won’t forget.” He tried
to rise, and fell back again into his chair. “Let me rest a little,” he
pleaded, “if I’m not in the way. I’m not fit company for you, I know;
I’ll go when you tell me.”

Randal refused to let him go at all. “You will stay here with me; and if
I happen to be away, there will be somebody in the house, who is
almost as fond of you as I am.” He mentioned the name of one of the old
servants at Mount Morven, who had attached himself to Randal after the
breakup of the family. “And now rest,” he said, “and let me put this
cushion under your head.”

Herbert answered: “It’s like being at home again”--and composed himself
to rest.



Chapter XL. Keep Your Temper.


On the next day but one, Randal arranged his departure for Sydenham,
so as to arrive at the hotel an hour before the time appointed for the
dinner. His prospects of success, in pleading for a favorable reception
of his brother’s message, were so uncertain that he refrained--in fear
of raising hopes which he might not be able to justify--from taking
Herbert into his confidence. No one knew on what errand he was bent,
when he left the house. As he took his place in the carriage, the
newspaper boy appeared at the window as usual. The new number of a
popular weekly journal had that day been published. Randal bought it.

After reading one or two of the political articles, he arrived at the
columns specially devoted to “Fashionable Intelligence.” Caring nothing
for that sort of news, he was turning over the pages in search of the
literary and dramatic articles, when a name not unfamiliar to him caught
his eye. He read the paragraph in which it appeared.


“The charming widow, Mrs. Norman, is, we hear, among the distinguished
guests staying at Buck’s Hotel. It is whispered that the lady is to be
shortly united to a retired naval officer of Arctic fame; now better
known, perhaps, as one of our leading philanthropists.”

The allusion to Bennydeck was too plain to be mistaken. Randal looked
again at the first words in the paragraph. “The charming widow!” Was
it possible that this last word referred to Catherine? To suppose her
capable of assuming to be a widow, and--if the child asked questions--of
telling Kitty that her father was dead, was, in Randal’s estimation, to
wrong her cruelly. With his own suspicions steadily contradicting him,
he arrived at the hotel, obstinately believing that “the charming widow”
 would prove to be a stranger.

A first disappointment was in store for him when he entered the house.
Mrs. Norman and her little daughter were out driving with a friend,
and were expected to return in good time for dinner. Mrs. Presty was at
home; she was reported to be in the garden of the hotel.

Randal found her comfortably established in a summerhouse, with her
knitting in her hands, and a newspaper on her lap. She advanced to meet
him, all smiles and amiability. “How nice of you to come so soon!”
 she began. Her keen penetration discovered something in his face which
checked the gayety of her welcome. “You don’t mean to say that you are
going to spoil our pleasant little dinner by bringing bad news!” she
added, looking at him suspiciously.

“It depends on you to decide that,” Randal replied.

“How very complimentary to a poor useless old woman! Don’t be
mysterious, my dear. I don’t belong to the generation which raises
storms in tea-cups, and calls skirmishes with savages battles. Out with
it!”

Randal handed his paper to her, open at the right place. “There is my
news,” he said.

Mrs. Presty looked at the paragraph, and handed _her_ newspaper to
Randal.

“I am indeed sorry to spoil your dramatic effect,” she said. “But
you ought to have known that we are only half an hour behind you,
at Sydenham, in the matter of news. The report is premature, my good
friend. But if these newspaper people waited to find out whether a
report is true or false, how much gossip would society get in its
favorite newspapers? Besides, if it isn’t true now, it will be true next
week. The author only says, ‘It’s whispered.’ How delicate of him! What
a perfect gentleman!”

“Am I really to understand, Mrs. Presty, that Catherine--”

“You are to understand that Catherine is a widow. I say it with pride, a
widow of my making!”

“If this is one of your jokes, ma’am--”

“Nothing of the sort, sir.”

“Are you aware, Mrs. Presty, that my brother--”

“Oh, don’t talk of your brother! He’s an obstacle in our way, and we
have been compelled to get rid of him.”

Randal drew back a step. Mrs. Presty’s audacity was something more than
he could understand. “Is this woman mad?” he said to himself.

“Sit down,” said Mrs. Presty. “If you are determined to make a serious
business of it--if you insist on my justifying myself--you are to be
pitied for not possessing a sense of humor, but you shall have your own
way. I am put on my defense. Very well. You shall hear how my divorced
daughter and my poor little grandchild were treated at Sandyseal, after
you left us.”

Having related the circumstances, she suggested that Randal should
put himself in Catherine’s place, before he ventured on expressing an
opinion. “Would you have exposed yourself to be humiliated again in the
same way?” she asked. “And would you have seen your child made to suffer
as well as yourself?”

“I should have kept in retirement for the future,” he answered, “and not
have trusted my child and myself among strangers in hotels.”

“Ah, indeed? And you would have condemned your poor little daughter
to solitude? You would have seen her pining for the company of other
children, and would have had no mercy on her? I wonder what you would
have done when Captain Bennydeck paid us a visit at the seaside? He was
introduced to Mrs. Norman, and to Mrs. Norman’s little girl, and we
were all charmed with him. When he and I happened to be left together
he naturally wondered, after having seen the beautiful wife, where the
lucky husband might be. If he had asked you about Mr. Norman, how would
you have answered him?”

“I should have told the truth.”

“You would have said there was no Mr. Norman?”

“Yes.”

“Exactly what I did! And the Captain of course concluded (after having
been introduced to Kitty) that Mrs. Norman was a widow. If I had set him
right, what would have become of my daughter’s reputation? If I had told
the truth at this hotel, when everybody wanted to know what Mrs. Norman,
that handsome lady, was--what would the consequences have been to
Catherine and her little girl? No! no! I have made the best of a
miserable situation; I have consulted the tranquillity of a cruelly
injured woman and an innocent child--with this inevitable result; I have
been obliged to treat your brother like a character in a novel. I have
ship-wrecked Herbert as the shortest way of answering inconvenient
questions. Vessel found bottom upward in the middle of the Atlantic, and
everybody on board drowned, of course. Worse stories have been printed;
I do assure you, worse stories have been printed.”

Randal decided on leaving her. “Have you done all this with Catherine’s
consent?” he asked as he got up from his chair.

“Catherine submits to circumstances, like a sensible woman.”

“Does she submit to your telling Kitty that her father is dead?”

For the first time Mrs. Presty became serious.

“Wait a minute,” she answered. “Before I consented to answer the child’s
inquiries, I came to an understanding with her mother. I said, ‘Will you
let Kitty see her father again?’”

The very question which Randal had promised to ask in his brother’s
interests! “And how did Catherine answer you?” he inquired.

“Honestly. She said: ‘I daren’t!’ After that, I had her mother’s
authority for telling Kitty that she would never see her father again.
She asked directly if her father was dead--”

“That will do, Mrs. Presty. Your defense is thoroughly worthy of your
conduct in all other respects.”

“Say thoroughly worthy of the course forced upon me and my daughter by
your brother’s infamous conduct--and you will be nearer the mark!”

Randal passed this over without notice. “Be so good,” he said, “as to
tell Catherine that I try to make every possible allowance for her, but
that I cannot consent to sit at her dinner-table, and that I dare not
face my poor little niece, after what I have heard.”

Mrs. Presty recovered all her audacity. “A very wise decision,” she
remarked. “Your sour face would spoil the best dinner that ever was put
on the table. Have you any message for Captain Bennydeck?”

Randal asked if his friend was then at the hotel.

Mrs. Presty smiled significantly. “Not at the hotel, just now.”

“Where is he?”

“Where he is every day, about this time--out driving with Catherine and
Kitty.”

It was a relief to Randal--in the present state of Catherine’s relations
toward Bennydeck--to return to London without having seen his friend.

He took leave of Mrs. Presty with the formality due to a stranger--he
merely bowed. That incorrigible old woman treated him with affectionate
familiarity in return.

“Good-by, dear Randal. One moment before you go! Will it be of any use
if we invite you to the marriage?”

Arrived at the station, Randal found that he must wait for the train.
While he was walking up and down the platform with a mind doubly
distressed by anxiety about his brother and anxiety about Sydney, the
train from London came in. He stood, looking absently at the passengers
leaving the carriage on the opposite side of the platform. Suddenly,
a voice that he knew was audible, asking the way to Buck’s Hotel. He
crossed the line in an instant, and found himself face to face with
Herbert.




Chapter XLI. Make the Best of It.


For a moment the two men looked at each other without speaking.
Herbert’s wondering eyes accurately reflected his brother’s
astonishment.

“What are you doing here?” he asked. Suspicion overclouded his face as
he put the question. “You have been to the hotel?” he burst out; “you
have seen Catherine?”

Randal could deny that he had seen Catherine, with perfect truth--and
did deny it in the plainest terms. Herbert was satisfied. “In all my
remembrance of you,” he said, “you have never told me a lie. We have
both seen the same newspaper, of course--and you have been the first to
clear the thing up. That’s it, isn’t it?”

“I wonder who this other Mrs. Norman is; did you find out?”

“No.”

“She’s not Catherine, at any rate; I, for one, shall go home with
a lighter heart.” He took his brother’s arm, to return to the other
platform. “Do you know, Randal, I was almost afraid that Catherine was
the woman. The devil take the thing, and the people who write in it!”

He snatched a newspaper out of his pocket as he spoke--tore it in
half--and threw it away. “Malcolm meant well, poor fellow,” he said,
referring to the old servant, “but he made a miserable man of me for all
that.”

Not satisfied with gossip in private, the greedy public appetite devours
gossip in print, and wants more of it than any one editor can supply.
Randal picked up the torn newspaper. It was not the newspaper which he
had bought at the station. Herbert had been reading a rival journal,
devoted to the interests of Society--in which the report of Mrs.
Norman’s marriage was repeated, with this difference, that it boldly
alluded to Captain Bennydeck by name. “Did Malcolm give you this?”
 Randal asked.

“Yes; he and the servant next door subscribe to take it in; and Malcolm
thought it might amuse me. It drove me out of the house and into
the railway. If it had driven me out of mind, I shouldn’t have been
surprised.”

“Gently, Herbert! Supposing the report had been true--?”

“After what you have told me, why should I suppose anything of the
sort?”

“Don’t be angry; and do pray remember that the Divorce allows you and
Catherine to marry again, if you like.”

Herbert became more unreasonable than ever. “If Catherine does think of
marrying again,” he said, “the man will have to reckon first with me.
But that is not the point. You seem to have forgotten that the woman at
Buck’s Hotel is described as a Widow. The bare doubt that my divorced
wife might be the woman was bad enough--but what I wanted to find out
was how she had passed off her false pretense on our child. _That_ was
what maddened me! No more of it now. Have you seen Catherine lately?”

“Not lately.”

“I suppose she is as handsome as ever. When will you ask her to let me
see Kitty?”

“Leave that to me,” was the one reply which Randal could venture to make
at the moment.

The serious embarrassments that surrounded him were thickening fast. His
natural frank nature urged him to undeceive Herbert. If he followed his
inclinations, in the near neighborhood of the hotel, who could say what
disasters might not ensue, in his brother’s present frame of mind? If
he made the disclosure on their return to the house, he would be only
running the same risk of consequences, after an interval of delay; and,
if he remained silent, the march of events might, at any moment, lead to
the discovery of what he had concealed. Add to this, that his confidence
in Catherine had been rudely shaken. Having allowed herself to be
entrapped into the deception proposed by her mother, and having thus far
persevered in that deception, were the chances in favor of her
revealing her true position--especially if she was disposed to encourage
Bennydeck’s suit? Randal’s loyalty to Catherine hesitated to decide
that serious question against the woman whom he had known, trusted, and
admired for so many years. In any event, her second marriage would lead
to one disastrous result. It would sooner or later come to Herbert’s
ears. In the meantime, after what Mrs. Presty had confessed, the cruel
falsehood which had checked poor Kitty’s natural inquiries raised an
insuperable obstacle to a meeting between father and child.

If Randal shrank from the prospect which thus presented itself to him,
in his relations with his brother, and if his thoughts reverted to
Sydney Westerfield, other reasons for apprehension found their way into
his mind.

He had promised to do his best toward persuading Catherine to grant
Sydney an interview. To perform that promise appeared to be now simply
impossible. Under the exasperating influence of a disappointment for
which she was not prepared, it was hard to say what act of imprudence
Sydney might not commit. Even the chance of successfully confiding her
to Bennydeck’s protection had lost something of its fair promise, since
Randal’s visit to Sydenham. That the Captain would welcome his friend’s
daughter as affectionately as if she had been his own child, was not to
be doubted for a moment. But that she would receive the same unremitting
attention, while he was courting Catherine, which would have been
offered to her under other circumstances, was not to be hoped. Be the
results, however, what they might, Randal could see but one plain
course before him now. He decided on hastening Sydney’s introduction to
Bennydeck, and on writing at once to prepare the Captain for that event.

Even this apparently simple proceeding required examination in its
different bearings, before he could begin his letter.

Would he be justified in alluding to the report which associated
Bennydeck with Catherine? Considerations of delicacy seemed to forbid
taking this liberty, even with an intimate friend. It was for the
Captain to confirm what Mrs. Presty had said of him, if he thought it
desirable to touch on the subject in his reply. Besides, looking to
Catherine’s interest--and not forgetting how she had suffered--had
Randal any right to regard with other than friendly feelings a second
marriage, which united her to a man morally and intellectually
the superior of her first husband? What happier future could await
her--especially if she justified Randal’s past experience of all that
was candid and truthful in her character--than to become his friend’s
wife?

Written under the modifying influence of these conclusions, his letter
contained the few words that follow:

“I have news for you which I am sure you will be glad to hear. Your old
friend’s daughter has abandoned her sinful way of life, and has made
sacrifices which prove the sincerity of her repentance. Without entering
into particulars which may be mercifully dismissed from notice, let me
only assure you that I answer for Sydney Westerfield as being worthy of
the fatherly interest which you feel in her. Shall I say that she may
expect an early visit from you, when I see her to-morrow? I don’t doubt
that I am free already to do this; but it will encourage the poor girl,
if I can speak with your authority.”

He added Sydney’s address in a postscript, and dispatched his letter
that evening.



On the afternoon of the next day two letters were delivered to Randal,
bearing the Sydenham postmark.

The first which he happened to take up was addressed to him in Mrs.
Presty’s handwriting. His opinion of this correspondent was expressed
in prompt action--he threw the letter, unopened, into the waste-paper
basket.

The next letter was from Bennydeck, written in the kindest terms, but
containing no allusion to any contemplated change in his life. He
would not be able (he wrote) to leave Sydenham for a day or two. No
explanation of the cause of this delay followed. But it might, perhaps,
be excusable to infer that the marriage had not yet been decided on, and
that the Captain’s proposals were still waiting for Catherine’s reply.

Randal put the letter in his pocket and went at once to Sydney’s
lodgings.




Chapter XLII. Try to Excuse Her.


The weather had been unusually warm. Of all oppressive summers a hot
summer in London is the hardest to endure. The little exercise that
Sydney could take was, as Randal knew, deferred until the evening. On
asking for her, he was surprised to hear that she had gone out.

“Is she walking?” he asked, “on a day such as this?”

No: she was too much overcome by the heat to be able to walk. The
landlady’s boy had been sent to fetch a cab, and he had heard Miss
Westerfield tell the driver to go to Lincoln’s Inn Fields.

The address at once reminded Randal of Mr. Sarrazin. On the chance of
making a discovery, he went to the lawyer’s office. It had struck him as
being just possible that Sydney might have called there for the second
time; and, on making inquiry, he found that his surmise was correct.
Miss Westerfield had called, and had gone away again more than an hour
since.

Having mentioned this circumstance, good Mr. Sarrazin rather abruptly
changed the subject.

He began to talk of the weather, and, like everybody else, he complained
of the heat. Receiving no encouragement so far, he selected politics as
his next topic. Randal was unapproachably indifferent to the state of
parties, and the urgent necessity for reform. Still bent, as it
seemed, on preventing his visitor from taking a leading part in the
conversation, Mr. Sarrazin tried the exercise of hospitality next.
He opened his cigar-case, and entered eagerly into the merits of his
cigars; he proposed a cool drink, and described the right method of
making it as distinguished from the wrong. Randal was not thirsty, and
was not inclined to smoke. Would the pertinacious lawyer give way
at last? In appearance, at least, he submitted to defeat. “You want
something of me, my friend,” he said, with a patient smile. “What is
it?”

“I want to know why Miss Westerfield called on you?”

Randal flattered himself that he had made a prevaricating reply simply
impossible. Nothing of the sort! Mr. Sarrazin slipped through his
fingers once more. The unwritten laws of gallantry afforded him a refuge
now.

“The most inviolate respect,” he solemnly declared, “is due to a lady’s
confidence--and, what is more, to a young lady’s confidence--and, what
is more yet, to a pretty young lady’s confidence. The sex, my dear
fellow! Must I recall your attention to what is due to the sex?”

This little outbreak of the foreign side of his friend’s character was
no novelty to Randal. He remained as indifferent to the inviolate claims
of the sex as if he had been an old man of ninety.

“Did Miss Westerfield say anything about me?” was his next question.

Slippery Mr. Sarrazin slid into another refuge: he entered a protest.

“Here is a change of persons and places!” he exclaimed. “Am I a witness
of the court of justice--and are you the lawyer who examines me? My
memory is defective, my learned friend. _Non mi ricordo._ I know nothing
about it.”

Randal changed his tone. “We have amused ourselves long enough,” he
said. “I have serious reasons, Sarrazin, for wishing to know what passed
between Miss Westerfield and you--and I trust my old friend to relieve
my anxiety.”

The lawyer was accustomed to say of himself that he never did things by
halves. His answer to Randal offered a proof of his accurate estimate of
his own character.

“Your old friend will deserve your confidence in him,” he answered. “You
want to know why Miss Westerfield called here. Her object in view was
to twist me round her finger--and I beg to inform you that she has
completely succeeded. My dear Randal, this pretty creature’s cunning is
remarkable even for a woman. I am an old lawyer, skilled in the ways
of the world--and a young girl has completely overreached me. She
asked--oh, heavens, how innocently!--if Mrs. Norman was likely to make a
long stay at her present place of residence.”

Randal interrupted him. “You don’t mean to tell me you have given her
Catherine’s address?”

“Buck’s Hotel, Sydenham,” Mr. Sarrazin answered. “She has got the
address down in her nice little pocketbook.”

“What amazing weakness!” Randal exclaimed.

Mr. Sarrazin cordially agreed with him. “Amazing weakness, as you say.
Pretty Miss Sydney has extracted more things, besides the address. She
knows that Mrs. Norman is here on business relating to new investments
of her money. She knows besides that one of the trustees is keeping us
waiting. She also made sensible remarks. She mentioned having heard Mrs.
Norman say that the air of London never agreed with her; and she hoped
that a comparatively healthy neighborhood had been chosen for Mrs.
Norman’s place of residence. This, you see, was leading up to the
discovery of the address. The spirit of mischief possessed me; I allowed
Miss Westerfield to take a little peep at the truth. ‘Mrs. Norman is not
actually in London,’ I said; ‘she is only in the neighborhood.’ For what
followed on this, my experience of ladies ought to have prepared me. I
am ashamed to say _this_ lady took me completely by surprise.”

“What did she do?”

“Fell on her knees, poor dear--and said: ‘Oh, Mr. Sarrazin, be kinder
to me than you have ever been yet; tell me where Mrs. Norman is!’--I put
her back in her chair, and I took her handkerchief out of her pocket and
I wiped her eyes.”

“And then you told her the address?”

“I was near it, but I didn’t do it yet. I asked what you had done in the
matter. Alas, your kind heart has led you to promise more than you could
perform. She had waited to hear from you if Mrs. Norman consented to see
her, and had waited in vain. Hard on her, wasn’t it? I was sorry, but I
was still obdurate. I only felt the symptoms which warned me that I was
going to make a fool of myself, when she let me into her secret for the
first time, and said plainly what she wanted with Mrs. Norman. Her
tears and her entreaties I had resisted. The confession of her motives
overpowered me. It is right,” cried Mr. Sarrazin, suddenly warming into
enthusiasm, “that these two women should meet. Remember how that poor
girl has proved that her repentance is no sham. I say, she has a right
to tell, and the lady whom she has injured has a right to hear, what she
has done to atone for the past, what confession she is willing to make
to the one woman in the world (though she _is_ a divorced woman) who is
most interested in hearing what Miss Westerfield’s life has been with
that wretched brother of yours. Ah, yes, I know what the English cant
might say. Away with the English cant! it is the worst obstacle to the
progress of the English nation!”

Randal listened absently: he was thinking.

There could be little doubt to what destination Sydney Westerfield had
betaken herself, when she left the lawyer’s office. At that moment,
perhaps, she and Catherine were together--and together alone.

Mr. Sarrazin had noticed his friend’s silence. “Is it possible you don’t
agree with me?” he asked.

“I don’t feel as hopefully as you do, if these two ladies meet.”

“Ah, my friend, you are not a sanguine man by nature. If Mrs. Norman
treats our poor Sydney just as a commonplace ill-tempered woman would
treat her, I shall be surprised indeed. Say, if you like, that she will
be insulted--of this I am sure, she will not return it; there is no
expiation that is too bitter to be endured by that resolute little
creature. Her fine nature has been tempered by adversity. A hard life
has been Sydney’s, depend upon it, in the years before you and I met
with her. Good heavens! What would my wife say if she heard me?
The women are nice, but they have their drawbacks. Let us wait till
tomorrow, my dear boy; and let us believe in Sydney without allowing our
wives--I beg your pardon, I mean _my_ wife--to suspect in what forbidden
directions our sympathies are leading us. Oh, for shame!”

Who could persist in feeling depressed in the company of such a man as
this? Randal went home with the influence of Mr. Sarrazin’s sanguine
nature in undisturbed possession of him, until his old servant’s gloomy
face confronted him at the door.

“Anything gone wrong, Malcolm?”

“I’m sorry to say, sir, Mr. Herbert has left us.”

“Left us! Why?”

“I don’t know, sir.”

“Where has he gone?”

“He didn’t tell me.”

“Is there no letter? No message?”

“There’s a message, sir. Mr. Herbert came back--”

“Stop! Where had he been when he came back?”

“He said he felt a little lonely after you went out, and he thought it
might cheer him up if he went to the club. I was to tell you where he
had gone if you asked what had become of him. He said it kindly and
pleasantly--quite like himself, sir. But, when he came back--if you’ll
excuse my saying so--I never saw a man in a worse temper. ‘Tell my
brother I am obliged to him for his hospitality, and I won’t take
advantage of it any longer.’ That was Mr. Herbert’s message. I tried to
say a word. He banged the door, and away he went.”

Even Randal’s patient and gentle nature rose in revolt against his
brother’s treatment of him. He entered his sitting-room in silence.
Malcolm followed, and pointed to a letter on the table. “I think you
must have thrown it away by mistake, sir,” the old man explained; “I
found it in the waste-paper basket.” He bowed with the unfailing respect
of the old school, and withdrew.

Randal’s first resolve was to dismiss his brother from further
consideration. “Kindness is thrown away on Herbert,” he thought; “I
shall treat him for the future as he has treated me.”

But his brother was still in his mind. He opened Mrs. Presty’s
letter--on the chance that it might turn the current of his thoughts in
a new direction.

In spite of Mrs. Presty, in spite of himself, his heart softened toward
the man who had behaved so badly to him. Instead of reading the letter,
he was now trying to discover a connection between his brother’s visit
to the club and his brother’s angry message. Had Herbert heard something
said, among gossiping members in the smoking-room, which might account
for his conduct? If Randal had belonged to the club he would have
gone there to make inquiries. How could he get the information that he
wanted, in some other way?

After considering it for a while, he remembered the dinner that he had
given to his friend Sarrazin on his return from the United States, and
the departure of the lawyer to his club, with a purpose in view which
interested them both. It was the same club to which Herbert belonged.
Randal wrote at once to Mr. Sarrazin, mentioning what had happened, and
acknowledging the anxiety that weighed on his mind.

Having instructed Malcolm to take the letter to the lawyer’s house,
and, if he was not at home, to inquire where he might be found, Randal
adopted the readiest means of composing himself, in the servant’s
absence, by lighting his pipe.

He was enveloped in clouds of tobacco-smoke--the only clouds which we
can trust never to prove unworthy of our confidence in them--when Mrs.
Presty’s letter caught his attention. If the month had been January
instead of July, he would have thrown it into the fire. Under present
circumstances, he took it up and read it:



“I bear no malice, dear Randal, and I write to you as affectionately as
if you had kept your temper on the occasion when we last met.

“You will be pleased to hear that Catherine was as thoroughly distressed
as you could wish her to be, when it became my disagreeable duty to
mention what had passed between us, by way of accounting for your
absence. She was quite unable to rally her spirits, even with dear
Captain Bennydeck present to encourage her.

“‘I am not receiving you as I ought,’ she said to him, when we began
dinner, ‘but there is perhaps some excuse for me. I have lost the regard
and esteem of an old friend, who has cruelly wronged me.’ From motives
of delicacy (which I don’t expect you to understand) she refrained from
mentioning your name. The prettiest answer that I ever heard was the
answer that the Captain returned. ‘Let the true friend,’ he said, ‘take
the place in your heart which the false friend has lost.’

“He kissed her hand. If you had seen how he did it, and how she looked
at him, you would have felt that you had done more toward persuading my
daughter to marry the Captain than any other person about her, myself
included. You had deserted her; you had thrown her back on the one true
friend left. Thank you, Randal. In our best interests, thank you.

“It is needless to add that I got out of the way, and took Kitty with
me, at the earliest opportunity--and left them by themselves.

“At bed-time I went into Catherine’s room. Our interview began and ended
in less than a minute. It was useless to ask if the Captain had proposed
marriage; her agitation sufficiently informed me of what had happened.
My one question was: ‘Dearest Catherine, have you said Yes?’ She turned
shockingly pale, and answered: ‘I have not said No.’ Could anything be
more encouraging? God bless you; we shall meet at the wedding.”



Randal laid down the letter and filled his pipe again. He was not in
the least exasperated; he was only anxious to hear from Mr. Sarrazin. If
Mrs. Presty had seen him at that moment, she would have said to herself:
“I forgot the wretch was a smoker.”

In half an hour more the door was opened by Malcolm, and Mr. Sarrazin in
person answered his friend.

“There are no such incorrigible gossips,” he said, “as men in the
smoking-room of a club. Those popular newspapers began the mischief, and
the editor of one of them completed it. How he got his information I am
not able to say. The small-talk turned on that report about the charming
widow; and the editor congratulated himself on the delicacy of his
conduct. ‘When the paragraph reached me,’ he said, ‘the writer mentioned
that Mrs. Norman was that well-known lady, the divorced Mrs. Herbert
Linley. I thought this rather too bad, and I cut it out.’ Your brother
appears to have been present--but he seldom goes to the club, and none
of the members knew him even by sight. Shall I give you a light? Your
pipe’s out.”

Randal’s feelings, at that moment, were not within reach of the
comforting influence of tobacco.

“Do you think your brother has gone to Sydenham?” Mr. Sarrazin asked.

Randal answered: “I haven’t a doubt of it now.”




Chapter XLIII. Know Your Own Mind.


The garden of the hotel at Sydenham had originally belonged to a
private house. Of great extent, it had been laid out in excellent taste.
Flower-beds and lawns, a handsome fountain, seats shaded by groups of
fine trees at their full growth, completed the pastoral charm of the
place. A winding path led across the garden from the back of the house.
It had been continued by the speculator who purchased the property,
until it reached a road at the extremity of the grounds which
communicated with the Crystal Palace. Visitors to the hotel had such
pleasant associations with the garden that many of them returned at
future opportunities instead of trying the attraction of some other
place. Various tastes and different ages found their wishes equally
consulted here. Children rejoiced in the finest playground they had
ever seen. Remote walks, secluded among shrubberies, invited persons of
reserved disposition who came as strangers, and as strangers desired to
remain. The fountain and the lawn collected sociable visitors, who were
always ready to make acquaintance with each other. Even the amateur
artist could take liberties with Nature, and find the accommodating
limits of the garden sufficient for his purpose. Trees in the foreground
sat to him for likenesses that were never recognized; and hills
submitted to unprovoked familiarities, on behalf of brushes which were
not daunted by distance.

On the day after the dinner which had so deplorably failed, in respect
of one of the guests invited, to fulfill Catherine’s anticipations,
there was a festival at the Palace. It had proved so generally
attractive to the guests at the hotel that the grounds were almost
deserted.

As the sun declined, on a lovely summer evening, the few invalids feebly
wandering about the flower-beds, or resting under the trees, began to
return to the house in dread of the dew. Catherine and her child, with
the nursemaid in attendance, were left alone in the garden. Kitty found
her mother, as she openly declared, “not such good company as usual.”
 Since the day when her grandmother had said the fatal words which
checked all further allusion to her father, the child had shown
a disposition to complain, if she was not constantly amused. She
complained of Mrs. Presty now.

“I think grandmamma might have taken me to the Crystal Palace,” she
said.

“My dear, your grandmamma has friends with her--ladies and gentlemen who
don’t care to be troubled with a child.”

Kitty received this information in a very unamiable spirit. “I hate
ladies and gentlemen!” she said.

“Even Captain Bennydeck?” her mother asked.

“No; I like my nice Captain. And I like the waiters. They would take me
to the Crystal Palace--only they’re always busy. I wish it was bedtime;
I don’t know what to do with myself.”

“Take a little walk with Susan.”

“Where shall I go?”

Catherine looked toward the gate which opened on the road, and proposed
a visit to the old man who kept the lodge.

Kitty shook her head. There was an objection to the old man. “He asks
questions; he wants to know how I get on with my sums. He’s proud of
his summing; and he finds me out when I’m wrong. I don’t like the
lodge-keeper.”

Catherine looked the other way, toward the house. The pleasant fall of
water in the basin of the distant fountain was just audible. “Go and
feed the gold-fishes,” she suggested.

This was a prospect of amusement which at once raised Kitty’s spirits.
“That’s the thing!” she cried, and ran off to the fountain, with the
nursemaid after her.

Catherine seated herself under the trees, and watched in solitude the
decline of the sun in a cloudless sky. The memory of the happy years
of her marriage had never been so sadly and persistently present to her
mind as at this time, when the choice of another married life waited her
decision to become an accomplished fact. Remembrances of the past, which
she had such bitter reason to regret, and forebodings of the future, in
which she was more than half inclined to believe, oppressed her at one
and the same moment. She thought of the different circumstances, so
widely separated by time, under which Herbert (years ago) and Bennydeck
(twenty-four hours since) had each owned his love, and pleaded for an
indulgent hearing. Her mind contrasted the dissimilar results.

Pressed by the faithless man who had so cruelly wronged her in
after-years, she only wondered why he had waited so long before he
asked her to marry him. Addressed with equal ardor by that other man,
whose age, whose character, whose modest devotion offered her every
assurance of happiness that a woman could desire, she had struggled
against herself, and had begged him to give her a day to consider.
That day was now drawing to an end. As she watched the setting sun, the
phantom of her guilty husband darkened the heavenly light; imbittered
the distrust of herself which made her afraid to say Yes; and left her
helpless before the hesitation which prevented her from saying No.

The figure of a man appeared on the lonely path that led to the lodge
gate.

Impulsively she rose from her seat as he advanced. She sat down again.
After that first act of indecision, the flutter of her spirits abated;
she was able to think.

To avoid him, after he had spared her at her own request, would have
been an act of ingratitude: to receive him was to place herself once
more in the false position of a woman too undecided to know her own
mind. Forced to choose between these alternatives, her true regard for
Bennydeck forbade her to think of herself, and encouraged her to wait
for him. As he came nearer, she saw anxiety in his face and observed an
open letter in his hand. He smiled as he approached her, and asked leave
to take a chair at her side. At the same time, when he perceived that
she had noticed his letter, he put it away hurriedly in his pocket.

“I hope nothing has happened to annoy you,” she said.

He smiled again; and asked if she was thinking of his letter. “It is
only a report,” he added, “from my second in command, whom I have left
in charge of my Home. He is an excellent man; but I am afraid his temper
is not proof against the ingratitude which we sometimes meet with. He
doesn’t yet make allowances for what even the best natures suffer, under
the deteriorating influence of self-distrust and despair. No, I am
not anxious about the results of this case. I forget all my anxieties
(except one) when I am with you.”

His eyes told her that he was about to return to the one subject that
she dreaded. She tried--as women will try, in the little emergencies of
their lives--to gain time.

“I am interested about your Home,” she said: “I want to know what sort
of place it is. Is the discipline very severe?”

“There is no discipline,” he answered warmly. “My one object is to be
a friend to my friendless fellow-creatures; and my one way of governing
them is to follow the teaching of the Sermon on the Mount. Whatever
else I may remind them of, when they come to me, I am determined not
to remind them of a prison. For this reason--though I pity the hardened
wanderers of the streets, I don’t open my doors to them. Many a refuge,
in which discipline is inevitable, is open to these poor sinners
already. My welcome is offered to penitents and sufferers of another
kind--who have fallen from positions in life, in which the sense of
honor has been cultivated; whose despair is associated with remembrances
which I may so encourage, with the New Testament to help me, as to
lead them back to the religious influences under which their purer
and happier lives may have been passed. Here and there I meet with
disappointments. But I persist in my system of trusting them as freely
as if they were my own children; and, for the most part, they justify my
confidence in them. On the day--if it ever comes--when I find discipline
necessary, I shall suffer my disappointment and close my doors.”

“Is your house open,” Catherine asked, “to men and women alike?”

He was eager to speak with her on a subject more interesting to him
even than his Home. Answering her question, in this frame of mind, his
thoughts wandered; he drew lines absently with his walking-stick on the
soft earth under the trees.

“The means at my disposal,” he said, “are limited. I have been obliged
to choose between the men and the women.”

“And you have chosen women?”

“Yes.”

“Why?”

“Because a lost woman is a more friendless creature than a lost man.”

“Do they come to you? or do you look for them?”

“They mostly come to me. There is one young woman, however, now waiting
to see me, whom I have been looking for. I am deeply interested in her.”

“Is it her beauty that interests you?”

“I have not seen her since she was a child. She is the daughter of an
old friend of mine, who died many years ago.”

“And with that claim on you, you keep her waiting?”

“Yes.”

He let his stick drop on the ground and looked at Catherine; but
he offered no explanation of his strange conduct. She was a little
disappointed. “You have been some time away from your Home,” she said;
still searching for his reasons. “When do you go back?”

“I go back,” he answered, “when I know whether I may thank God for being
the happiest man living.”

They were both silent.




Chapter XLIV. Think of Consequences.


Catherine listened to the fall of water in the basin of the fountain.
She was conscious of a faint hope--a hope unworthy of her--that Kitty
might get weary of the gold-fishes, and might interrupt them. No such
thing happened; no stranger appeared on the path which wound through the
garden. She was alone with him. The influences of the still and fragrant
summer evening were influences which breathed of love.

“Have you thought of me since yesterday?” he asked gently.

She owned that she had thought of him.

“Is there no hope that your heart will ever incline toward me?”

“I daren’t consult my heart. If I had only to consider my own
feelings--” She stopped.

“What else have you to consider?”

“My past life--how I have suffered, and what I have to repent of.”

“Has your married life not been a happy one?” he asked.

“Not a happy one--in the end,” she answered.

“Through no fault of yours, I am sure?”

“Through no fault of mine, certainly.”

“And yet you said just now that you had something to repent of?”

“I was not thinking of my husband, Captain Bennydeck, when I said that.
If I have injured any person, the person is myself.”

She was thinking of that fatal concession to the advice of her mother,
and to the interests of her child, which placed her in a false position
toward the honest man who loved her and trusted her. If he had been less
innocent in the ways of the world, and not so devotedly fond of her,
he might, little by little, have persuaded Catherine to run the risk of
shocking him by a confession of the truth. As it was, his confidence
in her raised him high above the reach of suspicions which might have
occurred to other men. He saw her turn pale; he saw distress in her
face, which he interpreted as a silent reproach to him for the questions
he had asked.

“I hope you will forgive me?” he said simply.

She was astonished. “What have I to forgive?”

“My want of delicacy.”

“Oh, Captain Bennydeck, you speak of one of your great merits as if
it were a fault! Over and over again I have noticed your delicacy, and
admired it.”

He was too deeply in earnest to abandon his doubts of himself.

“I have ignorantly led you to think of your sorrows,” he said; “sorrows
that I cannot console. I don’t deserve to be forgiven. May I make the
one excuse in my power? May I speak of myself?”

She told him by a gesture that he had made a needless request.

“The life I have led,” he resumed, “accounts, perhaps, in some degree,
for what is deficient in me. At school, I was not a popular boy; I only
made one friend, and he has long since been numbered with the dead. Of
my life at college, and afterward in London, I dare not speak to you;
I look back at it with horror. My school-friend decided my choice of a
profession; he went into the navy. After a while, not knowing what else
to do, I followed his example. I liked the life--I may say the sea saved
me. For years, I was never on shore for more than a few weeks at a time.
I saw nothing of society; I was hardly ever in the company of ladies.
The next change in my life associated me with an Arctic expedition.
God forbid I should tell you of what men go through who are lost in the
regions of eternal ice! Let me only say I was preserved--miraculously
preserved--to profit by that dreadful experience. It made a new man of
me; it altered me ( I hope for the better) into what I am now. Oh, I
feel that I ought to have kept my secret yesterday--I mean my daring to
love you. I should have waited till you knew more of me; till my conduct
pleased you perhaps, and spoke for me. You won’t laugh, I am sure, if I
confess (at my age!) that I am inexperienced. Never till I met you have
I known what true love is--and this at forty years old. How some people
would laugh! I own it seems melancholy to me.”

“No; not melancholy.”

Her voice trembled. Agitation, which it was not a pain but a luxury to
feel, was gently taking possession of her. Where another man might have
seen that her tenderness was getting the better of her discretion, and
might have presumed on the discovery, this man, innocently blind to his
own interests, never even attempted to take advantage of her. No more
certain way could have been devised, by the most artful lover, of
touching the heart of a generous woman, and making it his own.
The influence exerted over Catherine by the virtues of Bennydeck’s
character--his unaffected kindness, his manly sympathy, his religious
convictions so deeply felt, so modestly restrained from claiming
notice--had been steadily increasing in the intimacy of daily
intercourse. Catherine had never felt his ascendancy over her as
strongly as she felt it now. By fine degrees, the warning remembrances
which had hitherto made her hesitate lost their hold on her memory.
Hardly conscious herself of what she was doing, she began to search his
feelings in his own presence. Such love as his had been unknown in her
experience; the luxury of looking into it, and sounding it to its inmost
depths, was more than the woman’s nature could resist.

“I think you hardly do yourself justice,” she said. “Surely you don’t
regret having felt for me so truly, when I told you yesterday that my
old friend had deserted me?”

“No, indeed!”

“Do you like to remember that you showed no jealous curiosity to know
who my friend was?”

“I should have been ashamed of myself if I had asked the question.”

“And did you believe that I had a good motive--a motive which you might
yourself have appreciated--for not telling you the name of that friend?”

“Is he some one whom I know?”

“Ought you to ask me that, after what I have just said?”

“Pray forgive me! I spoke without thinking.”

“I can hardly believe it, when I remember how you spoke to me yesterday.
I could never have supposed, before we became acquainted with each
other, that it was in the nature of a man to understand me so perfectly,
to be so gentle and so considerate in feeling for my distress. You
confused me a little, I must own, by what you said afterward. But I am
not sure that ought to be severe in blaming you. Sympathy--I mean
such sympathy as yours--sometimes says more than discretion can always
approve. Have you not found it so yourself?”

“I have found it so with you.”

“And perhaps I have shown a little too plainly how dependent I am on
you--how dreadful it would be to me if I lost you too as a friend?”

She blushed as she said it. When the words had escaped her, she felt
that they might bear another meaning than the simple meaning which
she had attached to them. He took her hand; his doubts of himself, his
needless fear of offending her, restrained him no longer.

“You can never lose me,” he said, “if you will only let me be the
nearest friend that a woman can have. Bear with me, dearest! I ask for
so much; I have so little to offer in return. I dream of a life with you
which is perhaps too perfectly happy to be enjoyed on earth. And yet, I
cannot resign my delusion. Must my poor heart always long for happiness
which is beyond my reach? If an overruling Providence guides our course
through this world, may we not sometimes hope for happier ends than our
mortal eyes can see?”

He waited a moment--and sighed--and dropped her hand. She hid her face;
she knew what it would tell him: she was ashamed to let him see it.

“I didn’t mean to distress you,” he said sadly.

She let him see her face. For a moment only, she looked at him--and then
let silence tell him the rest.

His arms closed round her. Slowly, the glory of the sun faded from the
heavens, and the soft summer twilight fell over the earth. “I can’t
speak,” he whispered; “my happiness is too much for me.”

“Are you sure of your happiness?” she asked.

“Could I think as I am thinking now, if I were not sure of it?”

“Are you thinking of _me?_”

“Of you--and of all that you will be to me in the future. Oh, my angel,
if God grants us many years to come, what a perfect life I see!”

“Tell me--what do you see?”

“I see a husband and wife who are all in all to each other. If friends
come to us, we are glad to bid them welcome; but we are always happiest
by ourselves.”

“Do we live in retirement?”

“We live where you like best to live. Shall it be in the country?”

“Yes! yes! You have spoken of the sea as you might have spoken of your
best friend--we will be near the sea. But I must not keep you selfishly
all to myself. I must remember how good you have been to poor creatures
who don’t feel our happiness, and who need your kindness. Perhaps I
might help you? Do you doubt it?”

“I only doubt whether I ought to let you see what I have seen; I am only
afraid of the risk of making you unhappy. You tempt me to run the risk.
The help of a woman--and of such a woman as you are--is the one thing I
have wanted. Your influence would succeed where my influence has often
failed. How good, how thoughtful you would be!”

“I only want to be worthy of you,” she said, humbly. “When may I see
your Home?”

He drew her closer to him: tenderly and timidly he kissed her for the
first time. “It rests with you,” he answered. “When will you be my
wife?”

She hesitated; he felt her trembling. “Is there any obstacle?” he asked.

Before she could reply, Kitty’s voice was heard calling to her
mother--Kitty ran up to them.

Catherine turned cold as the child caught her by the hand, eagerly
claiming her attention. All that she should have remembered, all that
she had forgotten in a few bright moments of illusion, rose in judgment
against her, and struck her mind prostrate in an instant, when she felt
Kitty’s touch.

Bennydeck saw the change. Was it possible that the child’s sudden
appearance had startled her? Kitty had something to say, and said it
before he could speak.

“Mamma, I want to go where the other children are going. Susan’s gone to
her supper. You take me.”

Her mother was not even listening. Kitty turned impatiently to
Bennydeck. “Why won’t mamma speak to me?” she asked. He quieted her by a
word. “You shall go with me.” His anxiety about Catherine was more than
he could endure. “Pray let me take you back to the house,” he said. “I
am afraid you are not well.”

“I shall be better directly. Do me a kindness--take the child!”

She spoke faintly and vacantly. Bennydeck hesitated. She lifted her
trembling hands in entreaty. “I beg you will leave me!” Her voice, her
manner, made it impossible to disobey. He turned resignedly to Kitty and
asked which way she wanted to go. The child pointed down the path to
one of the towers of the Crystal Palace, visible in the distance. “The
governess has taken the others to see the company go away,” she said; “I
want to go too.”

Bennydeck looked back before he lost sight of Catherine.

She remained seated, in the attitude in which he had left her. At the
further end of the path which led to the hotel, he thought he saw a
figure in the twilight, approaching from the house. There would be help
near, if Catherine wanted it.

His uneasy mind was in some degree relieved, as he and Kitty left the
garden together.




Chapter XLV. Love Your Enemies.


She tried to think of Bennydeck.

Her eyes followed him as long as he was in sight, but her thoughts
wandered. To look at him now was to look at the little companion walking
by his side. Still, the child reminded her of the living father; still,
the child innocently tortured her with the consciousness of deceit. The
faithless man from whom the law had released her, possessed himself of
her thoughts, in spite of the law. He, and he only, was the visionary
companion of her solitude when she was left by herself.

Did he remind her of the sin that he had committed?--of the insult that
he had inflicted on the woman whom he had vowed to love and cherish? No!
he recalled to her the years of love that she had passed by his side; he
upbraided her with the happiness which she had owed to him, in the prime
and glory of her life. Woman! set _that_ against the wrong which I have
done to you. You have the right to condemn me, and Society has the right
to condemn me--but I am your child’s father still. Forget me if you can!

All thought will bear the test of solitude, excepting only the thought
that finds its origin in hopeless self-reproach. The soft mystery
of twilight, the solemn silence of the slowly-coming night, daunted
Catherine in that lonely place. She rose to return to light and human
beings. As she set her face toward the house, a discovery confronted
her. She was not alone.

A woman was standing on the path, apparently looking at her.

In the dim light, and at the distance between them, recognition of the
woman was impossible. She neither moved nor spoke. Strained to their
utmost point of tension, Catherine’s nerves quivered at the sight of
that shadowy solitary figure. She dropped back on the seat. In tones
that trembled she said: “Who are you? What do you want?”

The voice that answered was, like her own voice, faint with fear. It
said: “I want a word with you.”

Moving slowly forward--stopping--moving onward again--hesitating
again--the woman at last approached. There was light enough left to
reveal her face, now that she was near. It was the face of Sydney
Westerfield.

The survival of childhood, in the mature human being, betrays itself
most readily in the sex that bears children. The chances and changes of
life show the child’s mobility of emotion constantly associating
itself with the passions of the woman. At the moment of recognition the
troubled mind of Catherine was instantly steadied, under the influence
of that coarsest sense which levels us with the animals--the sense of
anger.

“I am amazed at your audacity,” she said.

There was no resentment--there was only patient submission in Sydney’s
reply.

“Twice I have approached the house in which you are living; and twice
my courage has failed me. I have gone away again--I have walked, I don’t
know where, I don’t know how far. Shame and fear seemed to be insensible
to fatigue. This is my third attempt. If I was a little nearer to you, I
think you would see what the effort has cost me. I have not much to say.
May I ask you to hear me?”

“You have taken me by surprise, Miss Westerfield. You have no right to
do that; I refuse to hear you.”

“Try, madam, to bear in mind that no unhappy creature, in my place,
would expose herself to your anger and contempt without a serious
reason. Will you think again?”

“No!”

Sydney turned to go away--and suddenly stopped.

Another person was advancing from the hotel; an interruption, a trivial
domestic interruption, presented itself. The nursemaid had missed the
child, and had come into the garden to see if she was with her mother.

“Where is Miss Kitty, ma’am?” the girl asked.

Her mistress told her what had happened, and sent her to the Palace to
relieve Captain Bennydeck of the charge that he had undertaken. Susan
listened, looking at Sydney and recognizing the familiar face. As the
girl moved away, Sydney spoke to her.

“I hope little Kitty is well and happy?”

The mother does not live who could have resisted the tone in which that
question was put. The broken heart, the love for the child that still
lived in it, spoke in accents that even touched the servant. She came
back; remembering the happy days when the governess had won their hearts
at Mount Morven, and, for a moment at least, remembering nothing else.

“Quite well and happy, miss, thank you,” Susan said.

As she hurried away on her errand, she saw her mistress beckon to Sydney
to return, and place a chair for her. The nursemaid was not near enough
to hear what followed.

“Miss Westerfield, will you forget what I said just now?” With those
words, Catherine pointed to the chair. “I am ready to hear you,” she
resumed--“but I have something to ask first. Does what you wish to say
to me relate only to yourself?”

“It relates to another person, as well as to myself.”

That reply, and the inference to which it led, tried Catherine’s
resolution to preserve her self-control, as nothing had tried it yet.

“If that other person,” she began, “means Mr. Herbert Linley--”

Sydney interrupted her, in words which she was entirely unprepared to
hear.

“I shall never see Mr. Herbert Linley again.”

“Has he deserted you?”

“No. It is _I_ who have left _him._”

“You!”

The emphasis laid on that one word forced Sydney to assert herself for
the first time.

“If I had not left him of my own free will,” she said, “what else would
excuse me for venturing to come here?”

Catherine’s sense of justice felt the force of that reply. At the same
time her sense of injury set its own construction on Sydney’s motive.
“Has his cruelty driven you away from him?” she asked.

“If he has been cruel to me,” Sydney answered, “do you think I should
have come here to complain of it to You? Do me the justice to believe
that I am not capable of such self-degradation as that. I have nothing
to complain of.”

“And yet you have left him?”

“He has been all that is kind and considerate: he has done everything
that a man in his unhappy position could do to set my mind at ease. And
yet I have left him. Oh, I claim no merit for my repentance, bitterly
as I feel it! I might not have had the courage to leave him--if he had
loved me as he once loved you.”

“Miss Westerfield, you are the last person living who ought to allude to
my married life.”

“You may perhaps pardon the allusion, madam, when you have heard what
I have still to say. I owe it to Mr. Herbert Linley, if not to you, to
confess that his life with me has _not_ been a life of happiness. He has
tried, compassionately tried, to keep his secret sorrow from discovery,
and he has failed. I had long suspected the truth; but I only saw it in
his face when he found the book you left behind you at the hotel. Your
image has, from first to last, been the one living image in his guilty
heart. I am the miserable victim of a man’s passing fancy. You have
been, you are still, the one object of a husband’s love. Ask your own
heart if the woman lives who can say to you what I have said--unless she
knew it to be true.”

Catherine’s head sank on her bosom; her helpless hands lay trembling
on her lap. Overpowered by the confession which she had just heard--a
confession which had followed closely on the thoughts inspired by the
appearance of the child--her agitation was beyond control; her mind was
unequal to the effort of decision. The woman who had been wronged--who
had the right to judge for herself, and to speak for herself--was the
silent woman of the two!

It was not quite dark yet. Sydney could see as well as hear.

For the first time since the beginning of the interview, she allowed the
impulse of the moment to lead her astray. In her eagerness to complete
the act of atonement, she failed to appreciate the severity of the
struggle that was passing in Catherine’s mind. She alluded again to
Herbert Linley, and she spoke too soon.

“Will you let him ask your pardon?” she said. “He expects no more.”

Catherine’s spirit was roused in an instant. “He expects too much!” she
answered, sternly. “Is he here by your connivance? Is he, too, waiting
to take me by surprise?”

“I am incapable, madam, of taking such a liberty with you as that; I may
perhaps have hoped to be able to tell him, by writing, of a different
reception--” She checked herself. “I beg your pardon, if I have ventured
to hope. I dare not ask you to alter your opinion--”

“Do you dare to look the truth in the face?” Catherine interposed. “Do
you remember what sacred ties that man has broken? what memories he has
profaned? what years of faithful love he has cast from him? Must I tell
you how he poisoned his wife’s mind with doubts of his truth and despair
of his honor, when he basely deserted her? You talk of your repentance.
Does your repentance forget that he would still have been my blameless
husband but for you?”

Sydney silently submitted to reproach, silently endured the shame that
finds no excuse for itself.

Catherine looked at her and relented. The noble nature which could stoop
to anger, but never sink to the lower depths of malice and persecution,
restrained itself and made amends. “I say it in no unkindness to you,”
 she resumed. “But when you ask me to forgive, consider what you ask me
to forget. It will only distress us both if we remain longer together,”
 she continued, rising as she spoke. “Perhaps you will believe that I
mean well, when I ask if there is anything I can do for you?”

“Nothing!”

All the desolation of the lost woman told its terrible tale in that one
word. Invited to rest herself in the hotel, she asked leave to remain
where she was; the mere effort of rising was too much for her now.
Catherine said the parting words kindly. “I believe in your good
intentions; I believe in your repentance.”

“Believe in my punishment!” After that reply, no more was said.

Behind the trees that closed the view at the further extremity of the
lawn the moon was rising. As the two women lost sight of each other, the
new light, pure and beautiful, began to dawn over the garden.




Chapter XLVI. Nil Desperandum.


No horror of her solitude, no melancholy recollections, no dread of the
future disturbed Sydney’s mind. The one sense left in her was the sense
of fatigue. Vacantly, mechanically, the girl rested as a tired animal
might have rested. She saw nothing, heard nothing; the one feeling
of which she was conscious was a dull aching in every limb. The moon
climbed the heavens, brightened the topmost leaves of the trees, found
the gloom in which Sydney was hidden, and cheered it tenderly with
radiant light. She was too weary to sleep, too weary even to shade her
face when the moonbeams touched it. While the light still strengthened,
while the slow minutes still followed each other unheeded, the one
influence that could rouse Sydney found her at last--set her faint heart
throbbing--called her prostrate spirit to life again. She heard a glad
cry of recognition in a child’s voice:

“Oh, Sydney, dear, is it you?”

In another instant her little pupil and playfellow of former days was in
her arms.

“My darling, how did you come here?”

Susan answered the question. “We are on our way back from the Palace,
miss. I am afraid,” she said, timidly, “that we ought to go in.”

Silently resigned, Sydney tried to release the child. Kitty clung to
her and kissed her; Kitty set the nurse at defiance. “Do you think I am
going to leave Syd now I have found her? Susan, I am astonished at you!”

Susan gave way. Where the nature is gentle, kindness and delicacy go
hand-in-hand together, undisturbed by the social irregularities which
beset the roadway of life. The nursemaid drew back out of hearing.
Kitty’s first questions followed each other in breathless succession.
Some of them proved to be hard, indeed, to answer truly, and without
reserve. She inquired if Sydney had seen her mother, and then she was
eager to know why Sydney had been left in the garden alone.

“Why haven’t you gone back to the house with mamma?” she asked.

“Don’t ask me, dear,” was all that Sydney could say. Kitty drew the
inevitable conclusion: “Have you and mamma quarreled?”

“Oh, no!”

“Then come indoors with me.”

“Wait a little, Kitty, and tell me something about yourself. How do you
get on with your lessons?”

“You dear foolish governess, do you expect me to learn my lessons, when
I haven’t got you to teach me? Where have you been all this long while?
_I_ wouldn’t have gone away and left _you!_” She paused; her eager eyes
studied Sydney’s face with the unrestrained curiosity of a child. “Is it
the moonlight that makes you look pale and wretched?” she said. “Or are
you really unhappy? Tell me, Syd, do you ever sing any of those songs
that I taught you, when you first came to us?”

“Never, dear!”

“Have you anybody to go out walking with you and running races with you,
as I did?”

“No, my sweet! Those days have gone by forever.”

Kitty laid her head sadly on Sydney’s bosom. “It’s not the moonlight,”
 she said; “shall I tell you a secret? Sometimes I am not happy either.
Poor papa is dead. He always liked you--I’m sure you are sorry for him.”

Astonishment held Sydney speechless. Before she could ask who had
so cruelly deceived the child, and for what purpose, the nursemaid,
standing behind the chair, warned her to be silent by a touch.

“I think we are all unhappy now,” Kitty went on, still following her own
little train of thought. “Mamma isn’t like what she used to be. And even
my nice Captain hasn’t a word to say to me. He wouldn’t come back with
us; he said he would go back by himself.”

Another allusion which took Sydney by surprise! She asked who the
Captain was. Kitty started as if the question shocked her. “Oh dear,
dear, this is what comes of your going away and leaving us! You don’t
know Captain Bennydeck.”

The name of her father’s correspondent! The name which she vaguely
remembered to have heard in her childhood! “Where did you first meet
with him?” she inquired.

“At the seaside, dear!”

“Do you mean at Sandyseal?”

“Yes. Mamma liked him--and grandmamma liked him (which is
wonderful)--and I gave him a kiss. Promise me not to tell! My nice
Captain is going to be my new papa.”

Was there any possible connection between what Kitty had just said, and
what the poor child had been deluded into believing when she spoke of
her father? Even Susan seemed to be in the secret of this strange second
marriage! She interfered with a sharp reproof. “You mustn’t talk in that
way, Miss Kitty. Please put her off your lap, Miss Westerfield; we have
been here too long already.”

Kitty proposed a compromise; “I’ll go,” she said, “if Syd will come with
me.”

“I’m sorry, my darling, to disappoint you.”

Kitty refused to believe it. “You couldn’t disappoint me if you tried,”
 she said boldly.

“Indeed, indeed, I must go away. Oh, Kitty, try to bear it as I do!”

Entreaties were useless; the child refused to hear of another parting.
“I want to make you and mamma friends again. Don’t break my heart,
Sydney! Come home with me, and teach me, and play with me, and love me!”

She pulled desperately at Sydney’s dress; she called to Susan to help
her. With tears in her eyes, the girl did her best to help them both.
“Miss Westerfield will wait here,” she said to Kitty, “while you speak
to your mamma.--Say Yes!” she whispered to Sydney; “it’s our only
chance.”

The child instantly exacted a promise. In the earnestness of her love
she even dictated the words. “Say it after me, as I used to say my
lessons,” she insisted. “Say, ‘Kitty, I promise to wait for you.’”

Who that loved her could have refused to say it! In one form or another,
the horrid necessity for deceit had followed, and was still following,
that first, worst act of falsehood--the elopement from Mount Morven.

Kitty was now as eager to go as she had been hitherto resolute to
remain. She called for Susan to follow her, and ran to the hotel.

“My mistress won’t let her come back--you can leave the garden that
way.” The maid pointed along the path to the left and hurried after the
child.

They were gone--and Sydney was alone again.

At the parting with Kitty, the measure of her endurance was full. Not
even the farewell at Mount Morven had tried her by an ordeal so cruel as
this. No kind woman was willing to receive her and employ her, now. The
one creature left who loved her was the faithful little friend whom
she must never see again. “I am still innocent to that child,” she
thought--“and I am parted from her forever!”

She rose to leave the garden.

A farewell look at the last place in which she had seen Kitty tempted
her to indulge in a moment of delay. Her eyes rested on the turn in the
path at which she had lost sight of the active little figure hastening
away to plead her cause. Even in absence, the child was Sydney’s good
angel still. As she turned away to follow the path that had been shown
to her, the relief of tears came at last. It cooled her burning head;
it comforted her aching heart. She tried to walk on. The tears blinded
her--she strayed from the path--she would have fallen but for a hand
that caught her, and held her up. A man’s voice, firm and deep and kind,
quieted her first wild feeling of terror. “My child, you are not fit to
be by yourself. Let me take care of you--let me comfort you, if I can.”

He carried her back to the seat that she had left, and waited by her in
merciful silence.

“You are very young to feel such bitter sorrow,” he said, when she was
composed again. “I don’t ask what your sorrow is; I only want to know
how I can help you.”

“Nobody can help me.”

“Can I take you back to your friends?”

“I have no friends.”

“Pardon me, you have one friend at least--you have me.”

“You? A stranger?”

“No human creature who needs my sympathy is a stranger.”

She turned toward him for the first time. In her new position, she was
clearly visible in the light. He looked at her attentively. “I have seen
you somewhere,” he said, “before now.”

She had not noticed him when they had passed each other at Sandyseal.
“I think you must be mistaken,” she answered. “May I thank you for your
kindness? and may I hope to be excused if I say good-night?”

He detained her. “Are you sure that you are well enough to go away by
yourself?” he asked anxiously.

“I am quite sure!”

He still detained her. His memory of that first meeting at the seaside
hotel reminded him that he had seen her in the company of a man. At
their second meeting, she was alone, and in tears. Sad experience led
him to form his own conclusions. “If you won’t let me take care of you,”
 he said, “will you consider if I can be of any use to you, and will you
call at that address?” He gave her his card. She took it without looking
at it; she was confused; she hardly knew what to say. “Do you doubt me?”
 he asked--sadly, not angrily.

“Oh, how can I do that! I doubt myself; I am not worthy of the interest
you feel in me.”

“That is a sad thing to say,” he answered. “Let me try to give you
confidence in yourself. Do you go to London when you leave this place?”

“Yes.”

“To-morrow,” he resumed, “I am going to see another poor girl who is
alone in the world like you. If I tell you where she lives, will you ask
her if I am a person to be trusted?”

He had taken a letter from his pocket, while he was speaking; and he
now tore off a part of the second leaf, and gave it to her. “I have only
lately,” he said, “received the address from a friend.”

As he offered that explanation, the shrill sound of a child’s voice,
raised in anger and entreaty, reached their ears from the neighborhood
of the hotel. Faithful little Kitty had made her escape, determined to
return to Sydney had been overtaken by the maid--and had been carried
back in Susan’s arms to the house. Sydney imagined that she was not
perhaps alone in recognizing the voice. The stranger who had been so
kind to her did certainly start and look round.

The stillness of the night was disturbed no more. The man turned again
to the person who had so strongly interested him. The person was gone.

In fear of being followed, Sydney hurried to the railway station. By the
light in the carriage she looked for the first time at the fragment of
the letter and the card.

The stranger had presented her with her own address! And, when she
looked at the card, the name was Bennydeck!




Chapter XLVII. Better Do It Than Wish It Done.


More than once, on one and the same day, the Captain had been guilty
of a weakness which would have taken his oldest friends by surprise, if
they had seen him at the moment. He hesitated.

A man who has commanded ships and has risked his life in the regions of
the frozen deep, is a man formed by nature and taught by habit to meet
emergency face to face, to see his course straight before him, and to
take it, lead him where it may. But nature and habit, formidable forces
as they are, find their master when they encounter the passion of Love.

At once perplexed and distressed by that startling change in Catherine
which he had observed when her child approached her, Bennydeck’s
customary firmness failed him, when the course of conduct toward his
betrothed wife which it might be most becoming to follow presented
itself to him as a problem to be solved. When Kitty asked him to
accompany her nursemaid and herself on their return to the hotel, he
had refused because he felt reluctant to intrude himself on Catherine’s
notice, until she was ready to admit him to her confidence of her own
free will. Left alone, he began to doubt whether delicacy did really
require him to make the sacrifice which he had contemplated not five
minutes since. It was surely possible that Catherine might be waiting
to see him, and might then offer the explanation which would prove to be
equally a relief on both sides. He was on his way to the hotel when he
met with Sydney Westerfield.

To see a woman in the sorest need of all that kindness and consideration
could offer, and to leave her as helpless as he had found her, would
have been an act of brutal indifference revolting to any man possessed
of even ordinary sensibility. The Captain had only followed his natural
impulses, and had only said and done what, in nearly similar cases, he
had said and done on other occasions.

Left by himself, he advanced a few steps mechanically on the way by
which Sydney had escaped him--and then stopped. Was there any sufficient
reason for his following her, and intruding himself on her notice?
She had recovered, she was in possession of his address, she had been
referred to a person who could answer for his good intentions; all that
it was his duty to do, had been done already. He turned back again, in
the direction of the hotel.

Hesitating once more, he paused half-way along the corridor which led
to Catherine’s sitting-room. Voices reached him from persons who had
entered the house by the front door. He recognized Mrs. Presty’s loud
confident tones. She was taking leave of friends, and was standing with
her back toward him. Bennydeck waited, unobserved, until he saw her
enter the sitting-room. No such explanation as he was in search of could
possibly take place in the presence of Catherine’s mother. He returned
to the garden.

Mrs. Presty was in high spirits. She had enjoyed the Festival; she had
taken the lead among the friends who accompanied her to the Palace; she
had ordered everything, and paid for nothing, at that worst of all bad
public dinners in England, the dinner which pretends to be French. In a
buoyant frame of mind, ready for more enjoyment if she could only
find it, what did she see on opening the sitting-room door? To use the
expressive language of the stage, Catherine was “discovered alone”--with
her elbows on the table, and her face hidden in her hands--the picture
of despair.

Mrs. Presty surveyed the spectacle before her with righteous indignation
visible in every line of her face. The arrangement which bound her
daughter to give Bennydeck his final reply on that day had been well
known to her when she left the hotel in the morning. The conclusion
at which she arrived, on returning at night, was expressed with Roman
brevity and Roman eloquence in four words:

“Oh, the poor Captain!”

Catherine suddenly looked up.

“I knew it,” Mrs. Presty continued, with her sternest emphasis; “I see
what you have done, in your face. You have refused Bennydeck.”

“God forgive me, I have been wicked enough to accept him!”

Hearing this, some mothers might have made apologies; and other mothers
might have asked what that penitential reply could possibly mean. Mrs.
Presty was no matron of the ordinary type. She welcomed the good news,
without taking the smallest notice of the expression of self-reproach
which had accompanied it.

“My dear child, accept the congratulations of your fond old mother. I
have never been one of the kissing sort (I mean of course where women
are concerned); but this is an occasion which justifies something quite
out of the common way. Come and kiss me.”

Catherine took no notice of that outburst of maternal love.

“I have forgotten everything that I ought to have remembered,” she said.
“In my vanity, in my weakness, in my selfish enjoyment of the passing
moment, I have been too supremely happy even to think of the trials of
my past life, and of the false position in which they have placed me
toward a man, whom I ought to be ashamed to deceive. I have only been
recalled to a sense of duty, I might almost say to a sense of decency,
by my poor little child. If Kitty had not reminded me of her father--”

Mrs. Presty dropped into a chair: she was really frightened. Her fat
cheeks trembled like a jelly on a dish that is suddenly moved.

“Has that man been here?” she asked.

“What man?”

“The man who may break off your marriage if he meets with the Captain.
Has Herbert Linley been here?”

“Certainly not. The one person associated with my troubles whom I have
seen to-day is Sydney Westerfield.”

Mrs. Presty bounced out of her chair. “You--have seen--Sydney
Westerfield?” she repeated with emphatic pauses which expressed
amazement tempered by unbelief.

“Yes; I have seen her.”

“Where?”

“In the garden.”

“And spoken to her?”

“Yes.”

Mrs. Presty raised her eyes to the ceiling. Whether she expected our old
friend “the recording angel” to take down the questions and answers that
had just passed, or whether she was only waiting to see the hotel that
held her daughter collapse under a sense of moral responsibility, it is
not possible to decide. After an awful pause, the old lady remembered
that she had something more to say--and said it.

“I make no remark, Catherine; I don’t even want to know what you and
Miss Westerfield said to each other. At the same time, as a matter of
convenience to myself, I wish to ascertain whether I must leave this
hotel or not. The same house doesn’t hold that woman and ME. Has she
gone?”

“She has gone.”

Mrs. Presty looked round the room. “And taken Kitty with her?” she
asked.

“Don’t speak of Kitty!” Catherine cried in the greatest distress. “I
have had to keep the poor innocent affectionate child apart from Miss
Westerfield by force. My heart aches when I think of it.”

“I’m not surprised, Catherine. My granddaughter has been brought up on
the modern system. Children are all little angels--no punishments--only
gentle remonstrance--‘Don’t be naughty, dear, because you will make poor
mamma unhappy.’ And then, mamma grieves over it and wonders over it,
when she finds her little angel disobedient. What a fatal system of
education! All my success in life; every quality that endeared me to
your father and Mr. Presty; every social charm that has made me the idol
of society, I attribute entirely to judicious correction in early life,
applied freely with the open hand. We will change the subject. Where is
dear Bennydeck? I want to congratulate him on his approaching marriage.”
 She looked hard at her daughter, and mentally added: “He’ll live to
regret it!”

Catherine knew nothing of the Captain’s movements. “Like you,” she told
her mother, “I have something to say to him, and I don’t know where he
is.”

Mrs. Presty still kept her eyes fixed on her daughter. Nobody, observing
Catherine’s face, and judging also by the tone of her voice, would have
supposed that she was alluding to the man whose irresistible attractions
had won her. She looked ill at ease, and she spoke sadly.

“You don’t seem to be in good spirits, my dear,” Mrs. Presty gently
suggested. “No lovers’ quarrel already, I hope?”

“Nothing of the kind.”

“Can I be of any use to you?”

“You might be of the greatest use. But I know only too well, you would
refuse.”

Thus far, Mrs. Presty had been animated by curiosity. She began now
to feel vaguely alarmed. “After all that I have done for you,” she
answered, “I don’t think you ought to say that. Why should I refuse?”

Catherine hesitated.

Her mother persisted in pressing her. “Has it anything to do with
Captain Bennydeck?”

“Yes.”

“What is it?”

Catherine roused her courage.

“You know what it is as well as I do,” she said. “Captain Bennydeck
believes that I am free to marry him because I am a widow. You might
help me to tell him the truth.”

“What!!!”

That exclamation of horror and astonishment was loud enough to have been
heard in the garden. If Mrs. Presty’s hair had been all her own, it must
have been hair that stood on end.

Catherine quietly rose. “We won’t discuss it,” she said, with
resignation. “I knew you would refuse me.” She approached the door. Her
mother got up and resolutely stood in the way. “Before you commit an act
of downright madness,” Mrs. Presty said, “I mean to try if I can stop
you. Go back to your chair.”

Catherine refused.

“I know how it will end,” she answered; “and the sooner it ends the
better. You will find that I am quite as determined as you are. A man
who loves me as _he_ loves me, is a man whom I refuse to deceive.”

“Let’s have it out plainly,” Mrs. Presty insisted. “He believes your
first marriage has been dissolved by death. Do you mean to tell him that
it has been dissolved by Divorce?”

“I do.”

“What right has he to know it?”

“A right that is not to be denied. A wife must have no secrets from her
husband.”

Mrs. Presty hit back smartly.

“You’re not his wife yet. Wait till you are married.”

“Never! Who but a wretch would marry an honest man under false
pretenses?”

“I deny the false pretenses! You talk as if you were an impostor. Are
you, or are you not, the accomplished lady who has charmed him? Are you,
or are you not, the beautiful woman whom he loves? There isn’t a stain
on your reputation. In every respect you are the wife he wants and the
wife who is worthy of him. And you are cruel enough to disturb the poor
man about a matter that doesn’t concern him! you are fool enough to
raise doubts of you in his mind, and give him a reproach to cast in your
teeth the first time you do anything that happens to offend him! Any
woman--I don’t care who she may be--might envy the home that’s waiting
for you and your child, if you’re wise enough to hold your tongue. Upon
my word, Catherine, I am ashamed of you. Have you no principles?”

She really meant it! The purely selfish considerations which she
urged on her daughter were so many undeniable virtues in Mrs. Presty’s
estimation. She took the highest moral ground, and stood up and crowed
on it, with a pride in her own principles which the Primate of all
England might have envied.

But Catherine’s rare resolution held as firm as ever. She got a little
nearer to the door. “Good-night, mamma,” was the only reply she made.

“Is that all you have to say to me?”

“I am tired, and I must rest. Please let me go.”

Mrs. Presty threw open the door with a bang.

“You refuse to take my advice?” she said. “Oh, very well, have your
own way! You are sure to prosper in the end. These are the days of
exhibitions and gold medals. If there is ever an exhibition of idiots at
large, I know who might win the prize.”

Catherine was accustomed to preserve her respect for her mother under
difficulties; but this was far more than her sense of filial duty could
successfully endure.

“I only wish I had never taken your advice,” she answered. “Many a
miserable moment would have been spared me, if I had always done what
I am doing now. You have been the evil genius of my life since Miss
Westerfield first came into our house.”

She passed through the open doorway--stopped--and came back again. “I
didn’t mean to offend you, mamma--but you do say such irritating things.
Good-night.”

Not a word of reply acknowledged that kindly-meant apology. Mrs.
Presty--vivacious Mrs. Presty of the indomitable spirit and the ready
tongue--was petrified. She, the guardian angel of the family, whose
experience, devotion, and sound sense had steered Catherine through
difficulties and dangers which must have otherwise ended in utter
domestic shipwreck--she, the model mother--had been stigmatized as
the evil genius of her daughter’s life by no less a person than that
daughter herself! What was to be said? What was to be done? What
terrible and unexampled course of action should be taken after such an
insult as this? Mrs. Presty stood helpless in the middle of the room,
and asked herself these questions, and waited and wondered and found no
answer.

An interval passed. There was a knock at the door. A waiter appeared. He
said: “A gentleman to see Mrs. Norman.”

The gentleman entered the room and revealed himself.

Herbert Linley!




Chapter XLVIII. Be Careful!


The divorced husband looked at his mother-in-law without making the
slightest sacrifice to the claims of politeness. He neither offered his
hand nor made his bow. His frowning eyebrows, his flushed face, betrayed
the anger that was consuming him.

“I want to see Catherine,” he said.

This deliberate rudeness proved to be the very stimulant that was
required to restore Mrs. Presty to herself. The smile that always meant
mischief made its threatening appearance on the old lady’s face.

“What sort of company have you been keeping since I last saw you?” she
began.

“What have you got to do with the company I keep?”

“Nothing whatever, I am happy to say. I was merely wondering whether you
have been traveling lately in the south part of Africa, and have lived
exclusively in the society of Hottentots. The only other explanation of
your behavior is that I have been so unfortunate as to offend you. But
it seems improbable--I am not your wife.”

“Thank God for that!”

“Thank God, as you say. But I should really be glad (as a mere matter
of curiosity) to know what your extraordinary conduct means. You present
yourself in this room uninvited, you find a lady here, and you behave
as if you had come into a shop and wanted to ask the price of something.
Let me give you a lesson in good manners. Observe: I receive you with a
bow, and I say: How do you do, Mr. Linley? Do you understand me?”

“I don’t want to understand you--I want to see Catherine.”

“Who is Catherine?”

“You know as well as I do--your daughter.”

“My daughter, sir, is a stranger to you. We will speak of her, if you
please, by the name--the illustrious name--which she inherited at her
birth. You wish to see Mrs. Norman?”

“Call her what you like. I have a word to say to her, and I mean to say
it.”

“No, Mr. Linley, you won’t say it.”

“We’ll see about that! Where is she?”

“My daughter is not well.”

“Well or ill, I shan’t keep her long.”

“My daughter has retired to her room.”

“Where is her room?”

Mrs. Presty moved to the fireplace, and laid her hand on the bell.

“Are you aware that this house is a hotel?” she asked.

“It doesn’t matter to me what it is.”

“Oh yes, it does. A hotel keeps waiters. A hotel, when it is as large as
this, has a policeman in attendance. Must I ring?”

The choice between giving way to Mrs. Presty, or being disgracefully
dismissed, was placed plainly before him. Herbert’s life had been the
life of a gentleman; he knew that he had forgotten himself; it was
impossible that he could hesitate.

“I won’t trouble you to ring,” he said; “and I will beg your pardon for
having allowed my temper to get the better of me. At the same time
it ought to be remembered, I think, in my favor, that I have had some
provocation.”

“I don’t agree with you,” Mrs. Presty answered. She was deaf to any
appeal for mercy from Herbert Linley. “As to provocation,” she added,
returning to her chair without asking him to be seated, “when you apply
that word to yourself, you insult my daughter and me. _You_ provoked?
Oh, heavens!”

“You wouldn’t say that,” he urged, speaking with marked restraint of
tone and manner, “if you knew what I have had to endure--”

Mrs. Presty suddenly looked toward the door. “Wait a minute,” she said;
“I think I hear somebody coming in.”

In the silence that followed, footsteps were audible outside--not
approaching the door, however, but retiring from it. Mrs. Presty had
apparently been mistaken. “Yes?” she said resignedly, permitting Herbert
to proceed.

He really had something to say for himself, and he said it with
sufficient moderation. That he had been guilty of serious offenses he
made no attempt to deny; but he pleaded that he had not escaped without
justly suffering for what he had done. He had been entirely in the wrong
when he threatened to take the child away from her mother by force of
law; but had he not been punished when his wife obtained her Divorce,
and separated him from his little daughter as well as from herself? (No:
Mrs. Presty failed to see it; if anybody had suffered by the Divorce,
the victim was her injured daughter.) Still patient, Herbert did not
deny the injury; he only submitted once more that he had suffered his
punishment. Whether his life with Sydney Westerfield had or had not been
a happy one, he must decline to say; he would only declare that it had
come to an end. She had left him. Yes! she had left him forever. He had
no wish to persuade her to return to their guilty life; they were both
penitent, they were both ashamed of it. But she had gone away without
the provision which he was bound in honor to offer to her.

“She is friendless; she may be in a state of poverty that I tremble to
think of,” Herbert declared. “Is there nothing to plead for me in such
anxiety as I am suffering now?” Mrs. Presty stopped him there; she had
heard enough of Sydney already.

“I see nothing to be gained,” she said, “by dwelling on the past; and I
should be glad to know why you have come to this place to-night.”

“I have come to see Kitty.”

“Quite out of the question.”

“Don’t tell me that, Mrs. Presty! I’m one of the wretchedest men living,
and I ask for the consolation of seeing my child. Kitty hasn’t forgotten
me yet, I know. Her mother can’t be so cruel as to refuse. She shall fix
her own time, and send me away when she likes; I’ll submit to anything.
Will you ask Catherine to let me see Kitty?”

“I can’t do it.”

“Why not?”

“For private reasons.”

“What reasons?”

“For reasons into which you have no right to inquire.”

He got up from his chair. His face presented the same expression which
Mrs. Presty had seen on it when he first entered the room.

“When I came in here,” he said, “I wished to be certain of one thing.
Your prevarication has told me what I wanted to know. The newspapers
had Catherine’s own authority for it, Mrs. Presty, when they called
her widow. I know now why my brother, who never deceived me before, has
deceived me about this. I understand the part that your daughter has
been playing--and I am as certain as if I had heard it, of the devilish
lie that one of you--perhaps both of you--must have told my poor child.
No, no; I had better not see Catherine. Many a man has killed his wife,
and has not had such good reason for doing it as I have. You are quite
right to keep me away from her.”

He stopped--and looked suddenly toward the door. “I hear her,” he cried,
“She’s coming in!”

The footsteps outside were audible once more. This time, they were
approaching; they were close to the door. Herbert drew back from it.
Looking round to see that he was out of the way, Mrs. Presty rushed
forward--tore open the door in terror of what might happen--and admitted
Captain Bennydeck.




Chapter XLIX. Keep the Secret.


The Captain’s attention was first attracted by the visitor whom he found
in the room. He bowed to the stranger; but the first impression produced
on him did not appear to have been of the favorable kind, when he turned
next to Mrs. Presty.

Observing that she was agitated, he made the customary apologies,
expressing his regret if he had been so unfortunate as to commit
an intrusion. Trusting in the good sense and good breeding which
distinguished him on other occasions, Mrs. Presty anticipated that he
would see the propriety of leaving her alone again with the person whom
he had found in her company. To her dismay he remained in the room; and,
worse still, he noticed her daughter’s absence, and asked if there was
any serious cause for it.

For the moment, Mrs. Presty was unable to reply. Her presence of
mind--or, to put it more correctly, her ready audacity--deserted her,
when she saw Catherine’s husband that had been, and Catherine’s husband
that was to be, meeting as strangers, and but too likely to discover
each other.

In all her experience she had never been placed in such a position of
embarrassment as the position in which she found herself now. The sense
of honor which had prompted Catherine’s resolution to make Bennydeck
acquainted with the catastrophe of married life, might plead her excuse
in the estimation of a man devotedly attached to her. But if the Captain
was first informed that he had been deceived by a person who was a
perfect stranger to him, what hope could be entertained of his still
holding himself bound by his marriage engagement? It was even possible
that distrust had been already excited in his mind. He must certainly
have heard a man’s voice raised in anger when he approached the
door--and he was now observing that man with an air of curiosity which
was already assuming the appearance of distrust. That Herbert, on his
side, resented the Captain’s critical examination of him was plainly
visible in his face. After a glance at Bennydeck, he asked Mrs. Presty
“who that gentleman was.”

“I may be mistaken,” he added; “but I thought your friend looked at me
just now as if he knew me.”

“I have met you, sir, before this.” The Captain made the reply with a
courteous composure of tone and manner which apparently reminded Herbert
of the claims of politeness.

“May I ask where I had the honor of seeing you?” he inquired.

“We passed each other in the hall of the hotel at Sandyseal. You had a
young woman with you.”

“Your memory is a better one than mine, sir. I fail to remember the
circumstance to which you refer.”

Bennydeck let the matter rest there. Struck by the remarkable appearance
of embarrassment in Mrs. Presty’s manner--and feeling (in spite of
Herbert’s politeness of language) increased distrust of the man whom he
had found visiting her--he thought it might not be amiss to hint
that she could rely on him in case of necessity. “I am afraid I have
interrupted a confidential interview,” he began; “and I ought perhaps to
explain--”

Mrs. Presty listened absently; preoccupied by the fear that Herbert
would provoke a dangerous disclosure, and by the difficulty of
discovering a means of preventing it. She interrupted the Captain.

“Excuse me for one moment; I have a word to say to this gentleman.”
 Bennydeck immediately drew back, and Mrs. Presty lowered her voice. “If
you wish to see Kitty,” she resumed, attacking Herbert on his weak side,
“it depends entirely on your discretion.”

“What do you mean by discretion?”

“Be careful not to speak of our family troubles--and I promise you shall
see Kitty. That is what I mean.”

Herbert declined to say whether he would be careful or not. He was
determined to find out, first, with what purpose Bennydeck had entered
the room. “The gentleman was about to explain himself to you,” he said
to Mrs. Presty. “Why don’t you give him the opportunity?”

She had no choice but to submit--in appearance at least. Never had she
hated Herbert as she hated him at that moment. The Captain went on with
his explanation. He had his reasons (he said) for hesitating, in
the first instance, to present himself uninvited, and he accordingly
retired. On second thoughts, however, he had returned, in the hope--

“In the hope,” Herbert interposed, “of seeing Mrs. Presty’s daughter?”

“That was one of my motives,” Bennydeck answered.

“Is it indiscreet to inquire what the other motive was?”

“Not at all. I heard a stranger’s voice, speaking in a tone which, to
say the least of it, is not customary in a lady’s room and I thought--”

Herbert interrupted him again. “And you thought your interference might
be welcome to the lady! Am I right?”

“Quite right.”

“Am I making another lucky guess if I suppose myself to be speaking to
Captain Bennydeck?”

“I shall be glad to hear, sir, how you have arrived at the knowledge of
my name.”

“Shall we say, Captain, that I have arrived at it by instinct?”

His face, as he made that reply, alarmed Mrs. Presty. She cast a look
at him, partly of entreaty, partly of warning. No effect was produced by
the look. He continued, in a tone of ironical compliment: “You must pay
the penalty of being a public character. Your marriage is announced in
the newspapers.”

“I seldom read the newspapers.”

“Ah, indeed? Perhaps the report is not true? As you don’t read the
newspapers, allow me to repeat it. You are engaged to marry the
‘beautiful widow, Mrs. Norman.’ I think I quote those last words
correctly?”

Mrs. Presty suddenly got up. With an inscrutable face that told no
tales, she advanced to the door. Herbert’s insane jealousy of the man
who was about to become Catherine’s husband had led him into a serious
error; he had driven Catherine’s mother to desperation. In that state of
mind she recovered her lost audacity, as a matter of course. Opening the
door, she turned round to the two men, with a magnificent impudence of
manner which in her happiest moments she had never surpassed.

“I am sorry to interrupt this interesting conversation,” she said; “but
I have stupidly forgotten one of my domestic duties. You will allow me
to return, and listen with renewed pleasure, when my household business
is off my mind. I shall hope to find you both more polite to each other
than ever when I come back.” She was in such a frenzy of suppressed rage
that she actually kissed her hand to them as she left the room!

Bennydeck looked after her, convinced that some sinister purpose was
concealed under Mrs. Presty’s false excuses, and wholly unable to
imagine what that purpose might be. Herbert still persisted in trying to
force a quarrel on the Captain.

“As I remarked just now,” he proceeded, “newspaper reports are not
always to be trusted. Do you seriously mean, my dear sir, to marry Mrs.
Norman?”

“I look forward to that honor and that happiness. But I am at a loss to
know how it interests you.”

“In that case allow me to enlighten you. My name is Herbert Linley.”

He had held his name in reserve, feeling certain of the effect which he
would produce when he pronounced it. The result took him completely by
surprise. Not the slightest appearance of agitation showed itself in
Bennydeck’s manner. On the contrary, he looked as if there was something
that interested him in the discovery of the name.

“You are probably related to a friend of mine?” he said, quietly.

“Who is your friend?”

“Mr. Randal Linley.”

Herbert was entirely unprepared for this discovery. Once more, the
Captain had got the best of it.

“Are you and Randal Linley intimate friends?” he inquired, as soon as he
had recovered himself.

“Most intimate.”

“It’s strange that he should never have mentioned me, on any occasion
when you and he were together.”

“It does indeed seem strange.”

Herbert paused. His brother’s keen sense of the disgrace that he had
inflicted on the family recurred to his memory. He began to understand
Randal’s otherwise unaccountable silence.

“Are you nearly related to Mr. Randal Linley?” the Captain asked.

“I am his elder brother.”

Ignorant on his part of the family disgrace, Bennydeck heard that reply
with amazement. From his point of view, it was impossible to account for
Randal’s silence.

“Will you think me very inquisitive,” Herbert resumed, “if I ask whether
my brother approves of your marriage?”

There was a change in his tone, as he put that question which warned
Bennydeck to be on his guard. “I have not yet consulted my friend’s
opinion,” he answered, shortly.

Herbert threw off the mask. “In the meantime, you shall have my
opinion,” he said. “Your marriage is a crime--and I mean to prevent it.”

The Captain left his chair, and sternly faced the man who had spoken
those insolent words.

“Are you mad?” he asked.

Herbert was on the point of declaring himself to have been Catherine’s
husband, until the law dissolved their marriage--when a waiter came in
and approached him with a message. “You are wanted immediately, sir.”

“Who wants me?”

“A person outside, sir. It’s a serious matter--there is not a moment to
lose.”

Herbert turned to the Captain. “I must have your promise to wait for
me,” he said, “or I don’t leave the room.”

“Make your mind easy. I shall not stir from this place till you have
explained yourself,” was the firm reply.

The servant led the way out. He crossed the passage, and opened the door
of a waiting-room. Herbert passed in--and found himself face to face
with his divorced wife.




Chapter L. Forgiveness to the Injured Doth Belong.


Without one word of explanation, Catherine stepped up to him, and spoke
first.

“Answer me this,” she said--“have you told Captain Bennydeck who I am?”

“Not yet.”

The shortest possible reply was the only reply that he could make, in
the moment when he first looked at her.

She was not the same woman whom he had last seen at Sandyseal, returning
for her lost book. The agitation produced by that unexpected meeting had
turned her pale; the overpowering sense of injury had hardened and aged
her face. This time, she was prepared to see him; this time, she was
conscious of a resolution that raised her in her own estimation. Her
clear blue eyes glittered as she looked at him, the bright color glowed
in her cheeks; he was literally dazzled by her beauty.

“In the past time, which we both remember,” she resumed, “you once
said that I was the most truthful woman you had ever known. Have I done
anything to disturb that part of your old faith in me?”

“Nothing.”

She went on: “Before you entered this house, I had determined to tell
Captain Bennydeck what you have not told him yet. When I say that, do
you believe me?”

If he had been able to look away from her, he might have foreseen what
was coming; and he would have remembered that his triumph over the
Captain was still incomplete. But his eyes were riveted on her face;
his tenderest memories of her were pleading with him. He answered as a
docile child might have answered.

“I do believe you.”

She took a letter from her bosom; and, showing it, begged him to remark
that it was not closed.

“I was in my bedroom writing,” she said, “When my mother came to me and
told me that you and Captain Bennydeck had met in my sitting-room. She
dreaded a quarrel and an exposure, and she urged me to go downstairs
and insist on sending you away--or permit her to do so, if I could not
prevail on myself to follow her advice. I refused to allow the shameful
dismissal of a man who had once had his claim on my respect. The only
alternative that I could see was to speak with you here, in private, as
we are speaking now. My mother undertook to manage this for me; she
saw the servant, and gave him the message which you received. Where is
Captain Bennydeck now?”

“He is waiting in the sitting-room.”

“Waiting for you?”

“Yes.”

She considered a little before she said her next words.

“I have brought with me what I was writing in my own room,” she resumed,
“wishing to show it to you. Will you read it?”

She offered the letter to him. He hesitated. “Is it addressed to me?” he
asked.

“It is addressed to Captain Bennydeck,” she answered.

The jealousy that still rankled in his mind--jealousy that he had
no more lawful or reasonable claim to feel than if he had been a
stranger--urged him to assume an indifference which he was far from
feeling. He begged that Catherine would accept his excuses.

She refused to excuse him.

“Before you decide,” she said, “you ought at least to know why I have
written to Captain Bennydeck, instead of speaking to him as I had
proposed. My heart failed me when I thought of the distress that he
might feel--and, perhaps of the contempt of myself which, good and
gentle as he is, he might not be able to disguise. My letter tells him
the truth, without concealment. I am obliged to speak of the manner in
which you have treated me, and of the circumstances which forced me
into acts of deception that I now bitterly regret. I have tried not to
misrepresent you; I have been anxious to do you no wrong. It is for
you, not for me, to say if I have succeeded. Once more, will you read my
letter?”

The sad self-possession, the quiet dignity with which she spoke,
appealed to his memory of the pardon that she had so generously granted,
while he and Sydney Westerfield were still guiltless of the injury
inflicted on her at a later time. Silently he took the letter from her,
and read it.

She kept her face turned away from him and from the light. The effort to
be still calm and reasonable--to suffer the heart-ache, and not to let
the suffering be seen--made cruel demands on the self-betraying nature
of a woman possessed by strong emotion. There was a moment when she
heard him sigh while he was reading. She looked round at him, and
instantly looked away again.

He rose and approached her; he held out the letter in one hand, and
pointed to it with the other. Twice he attempted to speak. Twice the
influence of the letter unmanned him.

It was a hard struggle, but it was for her sake: he mastered his
weakness, and forced his trembling voice to submit to his will.

“Is the man whom you are going to marry worthy of _this?_” he asked,
still pointing to the letter.

She answered, firmly: “More than worthy of it.”

“Marry him, Catherine--and forget Me.”

The great heart that he had so sorely wounded pitied him, forgave him,
answered him with a burst of tears. She held out one imploring hand.

His lips touched it--he was gone.




Chapter LI. Dum Spiro, Spero.


Brisk and smiling, Mrs. Presty presented herself in the waiting-room.
“We have got rid of our enemy!” she announced, “I looked out of the
window and saw him leaving the hotel.” She paused, struck with the
deep dejection expressed in her daughter’s attitude. “Catherine!”
 she exclaimed, “I tell you Herbert has gone, and you look as if you
regretted it! Is there anything wrong? Did my message fail to bring him
here?”

“No.”

“He was bent on mischief when I saw him last. Has he told Bennydeck of
the Divorce?”

“No.”

“Thank Heaven for that! There is no one to be afraid of now. Where is
the Captain?”

“He is still in the sitting-room.”

“Why don’t you go to him?”

“I daren’t!”

“Shall I go?”

“Yes--and give him this.”

Mrs. Presty took the letter. “You mean, tear it up,” she said, “and
quite right, too.”

“No; I mean what I say.”

“My dear child, if you have any regard for yourself, if you have any
regard for me, don’t ask me to give Bennydeck this mad letter! You won’t
hear reason? You still insist on it?”

“I do.”

“If Kitty ever behaves to you, Catherine, as you have behaved to me--you
will have richly deserved it. Oh, if you were only a child again, I’d
beat it out of you--I would!”

With that outburst of temper, she took the letter to Bennydeck. In less
than a minute she returned, a tamed woman. “He frightens me,” she said.

“Is he angry?”

“No--and that is the worst of it. When men are angry, I am never afraid
of them. He’s quiet, too quiet. He said: ‘I’m waiting for Mr. Herbert
Linley; where is he?’ I said. ‘He has left the hotel.’ He said:
‘What does that mean?’ I handed the letter to him. ‘Perhaps this will
explain,’ I said. He looked at the address, and at once recognized your
handwriting. ‘Why does she write to me when we are both in the same
house? Why doesn’t she speak to me?’ I pointed to the letter. He
wouldn’t look at it; he looked straight at me. ‘There’s some mystery
here,’ he said; ‘I’m a plain man, I don’t like mysteries. Mr. Linley had
something to say to me, when the message interrupted him. Who sent the
message? Do you know?’ If there is a woman living, Catherine, who would
have told the truth, in such a position as mine was at that moment, I
should like to have her photograph. I said I didn’t know--and I saw
he suspected me of deceiving him. Those kind eyes of his--you wouldn’t
believe it of them!--looked me through and through. ‘I won’t detain you
any longer,’ he said. I’m not easily daunted, as you know--the relief it
was to me to get away from him is not to be told in words. What do you
think I heard when I got into the passage? I heard him turn the key of
the door. He’s locked in, my dear; he’s locked in! We are too near him
here. Come upstairs.”

Catherine refused. “I ought to be near him,” she said, hopefully; “he
may wish to see me.”

Her mother reminded her that the waiting-room was a public room, and
might be wanted.

“Let’s go into the garden,” Mrs. Presty proposed. “We can tell the
servant who waits on us where we may be found.”

Catherine yielded. Mrs. Presty’s excitement found its overflow in
talking perpetually. Her daughter had nothing to say, and cared nothing
where they went; all outward manifestation of life in her seemed to be
suspended at that terrible time of expectation. They wandered here and
there, in the quietest part of the grounds. Half an hour passed--and no
message was received. The hotel clock struck the hour--and still nothing
happened.

“I can walk no longer,” Catherine said. She dropped on one of the
garden-chairs, holding by her mother’s hand. “Go to him, for God’s
sake!” she entreated. “I can endure it no longer.”

Mrs. Presty--even bold Mrs. Presty--was afraid to face him again. “He’s
fond of the child,” she suggested; “let’s send Kitty.”

Some little girls were at play close by who knew where Kitty was to
be found. In a few minutes more they brought her back with them. Mrs.
Presty gave the child her instructions, and sent her away proud of
her errand, and delighted at the prospect of visiting the Captain by
herself, as if she “was a grown-up lady.”

This time the period of suspense was soon at an end. Kitty came running
back. “It’s lucky you sent me,” she declared. “He wouldn’t have opened
the door to anybody else--he said so himself.”

“Did you knock softly, as I told you?” Mrs. Presty asked.

“No, grandmamma, I forgot that. I tried to open the door. He called
out not to disturb him. I said, ‘It’s only me,’ and he opened the door
directly. What makes him look so pale, mamma? Is he ill?”

“Perhaps he feels the heat,” Mrs. Presty suggested, judiciously.

“He said, ‘Dear little Kitty,’ and he caught me up in his arms and
kissed me. When he sat down again he took me on his knee, and he asked
if I was fond of him, and I said, ‘Yes, I am,’ and he kissed me again,
and he asked if I had come to stay with him and keep him company. I
forgot what you wanted me to say,” Kitty acknowledged, addressing Mrs.
Presty; “so I made it up out of my own head.”

“What did you tell him?”

“I told him, mamma was as fond of him as I was, and I said, ‘We will
both keep you company.’ He put me down on the floor, and he got up and
went to the window and looked out. I told him that wasn’t the way to
find her, and I said, ‘I know where she is; I’ll go and fetch her.’
He’s an obstinate man, our nice Captain. He wouldn’t come away from the
window. I said, ‘You wish to see mamma, don’t you?’ And he said ‘Yes.’
‘You mustn’t lock the door again,’ I told him, ‘she won’t like that’;
and what do you think he said? He said ‘Good-by, Kitty!’ Wasn’t it
funny? He didn’t seem to know what he was talking about. If you ask my
opinion, mamma, I think the sooner you go to him the better.” Catherine
hesitated. Mrs. Presty on one side, and Kitty on the other, led her
between them into the house.




Chapter LII. L’homme propose, et Dieu dispose.


Captain Bennydeck met Catherine and her child at the open door of the
room. Mrs. Presty, stopping a few paces behind them, waited in the
passage; eager to see what the Captain’s face might tell her. It told
her nothing.

But Catherine saw a change in him. There was something in his manner
unnaturally passive and subdued. It suggested the idea of a man whose
mind had been forced into an effort of self-control which had exhausted
its power, and had allowed the signs of depression and fatigue to find
their way to the surface. The Captain was quiet, the Captain was kind;
neither by word nor look did he warn Catherine that the continuity of
their intimacy was in danger of being broken--and yet, her spirits sank,
when they met at the open door.

He led her to a chair, and said she had come to him at a time when he
especially wished to speak with her. Kitty asked if she might remain
with them. He put his hand caressingly on her head; “No, my dear, not
now.”

The child eyed him for a moment, conscious of something which she had
never noticed in him before, and puzzled by the discovery. She walked
back, cowed and silent, to the door. He followed her and spoke to Mrs.
Presty.

“Take your grandchild into the garden; we will join you there in a
little while. Good-by for the present, Kitty.”

Kitty said good-by mechanically--like a dull child repeating a lesson.
Her grandmother led her away in silence.

Bennydeck closed the door and seated himself by Catherine.

“I thank you for your letter,” he said. “If such a thing is possible, it
has given me a higher opinion of you than any opinion that I have held
yet.”

She looked at him with a feeling of surprise, so sudden and so
overwhelming that she was at a loss how to reply. The last words which
she expected to hear from him, when he alluded to her confession, were
the words that had just passed his lips.

“You have owned to faults that you have committed, and deceptions that
you have sanctioned,” he went on--“with nothing to gain, and everything
to lose, by telling the truth. Who but a good woman would have done
that?”

There was a deeper feeling in him than he had ventured to express. It
betrayed itself by a momentary trembling in his voice. Catherine drew a
little closer to him.

“You don’t know how you surprise me, how you relieve me,” she said,
warmly--and pressed his hand. In the eagerness of her gratitude, in the
gladness that had revived her sinking heart, she failed to feel that the
pressure was not returned.

“What have I said to surprise you?” he asked. “What anxiety have I
relieved, without knowing it?”

“I was afraid you would despise me.”

“Why should I despise you?”

“Have I not gained your good opinion under false pretenses? Have I not
allowed you to admire me and to love me without telling you that there
was anything in my past life which I have reason to regret? Even now,
I can hardly realize that you excuse and forgive me; you, who have
read the confession of my worst faults; you, who know the shocking
inconsistencies of my character--”

“Say at once,” he answered, “that I know you to be a mortal creature. Is
there any human character, even the noblest, that is always consistently
good?”

“One reads of them sometimes,” she suggested, “in books.”

“Yes,” he said. “In the worst books you could possibly read--the only
really immoral books written in our time.”

“Why are they immoral?”

“For this plain reason, that they deliberately pervert the truth.
Clap-trap, you innocent creature, to catch foolish readers! When do
these consistently good people appear in the life around us, the life
that we all see? Never! Are the best mortals that ever lived above the
reach of temptation to do ill, and are they always too good to yield to
it? How does the Lord’s Prayer instruct humanity? It commands us all,
without exception, to pray that we may not be led into temptation. You
have been led into temptation. In other words, you are a human being.
All that a human being could do you have done--you have repented and
confessed. Don’t I know how you have suffered and how you have been
tried! Why, what a mean Pharisee I should be if I presumed to despise
you!”

She looked at him proudly and gratefully; she lifted her arm as if to
thank him by an embrace, and suddenly let it drop again at her side.

“Am I tormenting myself without cause?” she said. “Or is there something
that looks like sorrow, showing itself to me in your face?”

“You see the bitterest sorrow that I have felt in all my sad life.”

“Is it sorrow for me?”

“No. Sorrow for myself.”

“Has it come to you through me? Is it my fault?”

“It is more your misfortune than your fault.”

“Then you can feel for me?”

“I can and do.”

He had not yet set her at ease.

“I am afraid your sympathy stops somewhere,” she said. “Where does it
stop?”

For the first time, he shrank from directly answering her. “I begin to
wish I had followed your example,” he owned. “It might have been better
for both of us if I had answered your letter in writing.”

“Tell me plainly,” she cried, “is there something you can’t forgive?”

“There is something I can’t forget.”

“What is it? Oh, what is it! When my mother told poor little Kitty that
her father was dead, are you even more sorry than I am that I allowed
it? Are you even more ashamed of me than I am of myself?”

“No. I regret that you allowed it; but I understand how you were led
into that error. Your husband’s infidelity had shaken his hold on your
respect for him and your sympathy with him, and had so left you without
your natural safeguard against Mrs. Presty’s sophistical reasoning
and bad example. But for _that_ wrong-doing, there is a remedy left.
Enlighten your child as you have enlightened me; and then--I have no
personal motive for pleading Mr. Herbert Linley’s cause, after what
I have seen of him--and then, acknowledge the father’s claim on the
child.”

“Do you mean his claim to see her?”

“What else can I mean? Yes! let him see her. Do (God help me, now when
it’s too late!)--do what you ought to have done, on that accursed day
which will be the blackest day in my calendar, to the end of my life.”

“What day do you mean?”

“The day when you remembered the law of man, and forgot the law of God;
the day when you broke the marriage tie, the sacred tie, by a Divorce!”

She listened--not conscious now of suspense or fear; she listened, with
her whole heart in revolt against him.

“You are too cruel!” she declared. “You can feel for me, you can
understand me, you can pardon me in everything else that I have done.
But you judge without mercy of the one blameless act of my life, since
my husband left me--the act that protected a mother in the exercise of
her rights. Oh, can it be you? Can it be you?”

“It can be,” he said, sighing bitterly; “and it is.”

“What horrible delusion possesses you? Why do you curse the happy day,
the blessed day, which saw me safe in the possession of my child?”

“For the worst and meanest of reasons,” he answered--“a selfish reason.
Don’t suppose that I have spoken of Divorce as one who has had occasion
to think of it. I have had no occasion to think of it; I don’t think of
it even now. I abhor it because it stands between you and me. I loathe
it, I curse it because it separates us for life.”

“Separates us for life? How?”

“Can you ask me?”

“Yes, I do ask you!”

He looked round him. A society of religious persons had visited the
hotel, and had obtained permission to place a copy of the Bible in every
room. One of those copies lay on the chimney-piece in Catherine’s room.
Bennydeck brought it to her, and placed it on the table near which she
was sitting. He turned to the New Testament, and opened it at the Gospel
of Saint Matthew. With his hand on the page, he said:

“I have done my best rightly to understand the duties of a Christian.
One of those duties, as I interpret them, is to let what I believe show
itself in what I do. You have seen enough of me, I hope, to know (though
I have not been forward in speaking of it) that I am, to the best of my
poor ability, a faithful follower of the teachings of Christ. I dare not
set my own interests and my own happiness above His laws. If I suffer in
obeying them as I suffer now, I must still submit. They are the laws of
my life.”

“Is it through me that you suffer?”

“It is through you.”

“Will you tell me how?”

He had already found the chapter. His tears dropped on it as he pointed
to the verse.

“Read,” he answered, “what the most compassionate of all Teachers has
said, in the Sermon on the Mount.”

She read: “Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth
adultery.”

Another innocent woman, in her place, might have pointed to that first
part of the verse, which pre-supposes the infidelity of the divorced
wife, and might have asked if those words applied to _her_. This woman,
knowing that she had lost him, knew also what she owed to herself. She
rose in silence, and held out her hand at parting.

He paused before he took her hand. “Can you forgive me?” he asked.

She said: “I can pity you.”

“Can you look back to the day of your marriage? Can you remember the
words which declared the union between you and your husband to be
separable only by death? Has he treated you with brutal cruelty?”

“Never!”

“Has he repented of his sin?”

“Yes.”

“Ask your own conscience if there is not a worthier life for you and
your child than the life that you are leading now.” He waited, after
that appeal to her. The silence remained unbroken. “Do not mistake me,”
 he resumed gently. “I am not thinking of the calamity that has fallen on
me in a spirit of selfish despair--I am looking to _your_ future, and I
am trying to show you the way which leads to hope. Catherine! have you
no word more to say to me?”

In faint trembling tones she answered him at last:

“You have left me but one word to say. Farewell!”

He drew her to him gently, and kissed her on the forehead. The agony
in his face was more than she could support; she recoiled from it in
horror. His last act was devoted to the tranquillity of the one woman
whom he had loved. He signed to her to leave him.



Chapter LIII. The Largest Nature, the Longest Love.


Mrs. Presty waited in the garden to be joined by her daughter and
Captain Bennydeck, and waited in vain. It was past her grandchild’s
bedtime; she decided on returning to the house.

“Suppose we look for them in the sitting-room?” Kitty proposed.

“Suppose we wait a moment, before we go in?” her wise grandmother
advised. “If I hear them talking I shall take you upstairs to bed.”

“Why?”

Mrs. Presty favored Kitty with a hint relating to the management of
inquisitive children which might prove useful to her in after-life.
“When you grow up to be a woman, my dear, beware of making the mistake
that I have just committed. Never be foolish enough to mention your
reasons when a child asks, Why?”

“Was that how they treated _you_, grandmamma, when you were a child
yourself?”

“Of course it was!”

“Why?”

They had reached the sitting-room door by this time. Kitty opened it
without ceremony and looked in. The room was empty.

Having confided her granddaughter to the nursemaid’s care, Mrs. Presty
knocked at Catherine’s bedroom door. “May I come in?”

“Come in directly! Where is Kitty?”

“Susan is putting her to bed.”

“Stop it! Kitty mustn’t go to bed. No questions. I’ll explain myself
when you come back.” There was a wildness in her eyes, and a tone of
stern command in her voice, which warned her mother to set dignity
aside, and submit.

“I don’t ask what has happened,” Mrs. Presty resumed on her return.
“That letter, that fatal letter to the Captain, has justified my worst
fears. What in Heaven’s name are we to do now?”

“We are to leave this hotel,” was the instant reply.

“When?”

“To-night.”

“Catherine! do you know what time it is?”

“Time enough to catch the last train to London. Don’t raise objections!
If I stay at this place, with associations in every part of it which
remind me of that unhappy man, I shall go mad! The shock I have
suffered, the misery, the humiliation--I tell you it’s more than I can
bear. Stay here by yourself if you like; I mean to go.”

She paced with frantic rapidity up and down the room. Mrs. Presty took
the only way by which it was possible to calm her. “Compose yourself,
Catherine, and all that you wish shall be done. I’ll settle everything
with the landlord, and give the maid her orders. Sit down by the open
window; let the wind blow over you.”

The railway service from Sydenham to London is a late service. At a few
minutes before midnight they were in time for the last train. When they
left the station, Catherine was calm enough to communicate her plans
for the future. The nearest hotel to the terminus would offer them
accommodation for that night. On the next day they could find some
quiet place in the country--no matter where, so long as they were
not disturbed. “Give me rest and peace, and my mind will be easier,”
 Catherine said. “Let nobody know where to find me.”

These conditions were strictly observed--with an exception in favor of
Mr. Sarrazin. While his client’s pecuniary affairs were still unsettled,
the lawyer had his claim to be taken into her confidence.

             * * * * *

The next morning found Captain Bennydeck still keeping his rooms at
Sydenham. The state of his mind presented a complete contrast to the
state of Catherine’s mind. So far from sharing her aversion to the
personal associations which were connected with the hotel, he found his
one consolation in visiting the scenes which reminded him of the beloved
woman whom he had lost. The reason for this was not far to seek. His was
the largest nature, and his had been the most devoted love.

As usual, his letters were forwarded to him from his place of residence
in London. Those addressed in handwritings that he knew were the first
that he read. The others he took out with him to that sequestered part
of the garden in which he had passed the happiest hours of his life by
Catherine’s side.

He had been thinking of her all the morning; he was thinking of her now.

His better judgment protested; his accusing conscience warned him that
he was committing, not only an act of folly but (with his religious
convictions) an act of sin--and still she held her place in his
thoughts. The manager had told him of her sudden departure from the
hotel, and had declared with perfect truth that the place of her
destination had not been communicated to him. Asked if she had left
no directions relating to her correspondence, he had replied that his
instructions were to forward all letters to her lawyer. On the point of
inquiring next for the name and address, Bennydeck’s sense of duty and
sense of shame (roused at last) filled him with a timely contempt for
himself. In feeling tempted to write to Catherine--in encouraging fond
thoughts of her among scenes which kept her in his memory--he had been
false to the very principles to which he had appealed at their farewell
interview. She had set him the right example, the example which he was
determined to follow, in leaving the place. Before he could falter in
his resolution, he gave notice of his departure. The one hope for him
now was to find a refuge from himself in acts of mercy. Consolation was
perhaps waiting for him in his Home.

His unopened correspondence offered a harmless occupation to his
thoughts, in the meanwhile. One after another he read the letters, with
an attention constantly wandering and constantly recalled, until he
opened the last of them that remained. In a moment more his interest was
absorbed. The first sentences in the letter told him that the deserted
creature whom he had met in the garden--the stranger to whom he had
offered help and consolation in the present and in the future--was no
other than the lost girl of whom he had been so long in search; the
daughter of Roderick Westerfield, once his dearest and oldest friend.

In the pages that followed, the writer confided to him her sad story;
leaving it to her father’s friend to decide whether she was worthy of
the sympathy which he had offered to her, when he thought she was a
stranger.

This part of her letter was necessarily a repetition of what Bennydeck
had read, in the confession which Catherine had addressed to him. That
generous woman had been guilty of one, and but one, concealment of the
truth. In relating the circumstances under which the elopement from
Mount Morven had taken place, she had abstained, in justice to the
sincerity of Sydney’s repentance, from mentioning Sydney’s name.
“Another instance,” the Captain thought bitterly, as he closed the
letter, “of the virtues which might have made the happiness of my life!”

But he was bound to remember--and he did remember--that there was now a
new interest, tenderly associating itself with his life to come. The
one best way of telling Sydney how dear she was to him already, for
her father’s sake, would be to answer her in person. He hurried away to
London by the first train, and drove at once to Randal’s place of abode
to ask for Sydney’s address.

Wondering what had become of the postscript to his letter, which had
given Bennydeck the information of which he was now in search, Randal
complied with his friend’s request, and then ventured to allude to the
report of the Captain’s marriage engagement.

“Am I to congratulate you?” he asked.

“Congratulate me on having discovered Roderick Westerfield’s daughter.”

That reply, and the tone in which it was given, led Randal to ask if the
engagement had been prematurely announced.

“There is no engagement at all,” Bennydeck answered, with a look which
suggested that it might be wise not to dwell on the subject.

But the discovery was welcome to Randal, for his brother’s sake. He
ran the risk of consequences, and inquired if Catherine was still to be
found at the hotel.

The Captain answered by a sign in the negative.

Randal persisted. “Do you know where she has gone?”

“Nobody knows but her lawyer.”

“In that case,” Randal concluded, “I shall get the information that
I want.” Noticing that Bennydeck looked surprised, he mentioned his
motive. “Herbert is pining to see Kitty,” he continued; “and I mean to
help him. He has done all that a man could do to atone for the past. As
things are, I believe I shall not offend Catherine, if I arrange for a
meeting between father and child. What do you say?”

Bennydeck answered, earnestly and eagerly: “Do it at once!”

They left the house together--one to go to Sydney’s lodgings, the other
on his way to Mr. Sarrazin’s office.




Chapter LIV. Let Bygones Be Bygones.


When the servant at the lodgings announced a visitor, and mentioned his
name, Sydney’s memory (instead of dwelling on the recollection of
the Captain’s kindness) perversely recalled the letter that she had
addressed to him, and reminded her that she stood in need of indulgence,
which even so good a man might hesitate to grant. Bennydeck’s first
words told the friendless girl that her fears had wronged him.

“My dear, how like your father you are! You have his eyes and his smile;
I can’t tell you how pleasantly you remind me of my dear old friend.” He
took her hand, and kissed her as he might have kissed a daughter of his
own. “Do you remember me at home, Sydney, when you were a child? No: you
must have been too young for that.”

She was deeply touched. In faint trembling tones she said; “I remember
your name; my poor father often spoke of you.”

A man who feels true sympathy is never in danger of mistaking his way
to a woman’s heart, when that woman has suffered. Bennydeck consoled,
interested, charmed Sydney, by still speaking of the bygone days at
home.

“I well remember how fond your father was of you, and what a bright
little girl you were,” the Captain went on. “You have forgotten, I dare
say, the old-fashioned sea-songs that he used to be so fond of teaching
you. It was the strangest and prettiest contrast, to hear your small
piping child’s voice singing of storms and shipwrecks, and thunder and
lightning, and reefing sails in cold and darkness, without the least
idea of what it all meant. Your mother was strict in those days; you
never amused her as you used to amuse your father and me. When she
caught you searching my pockets for sweetmeats, she accused me of
destroying your digestion before you were five years old. I went on
spoiling it, for all that. The last time I saw you, my child, your
father was singing ‘The Mariners of England,’ and you were on his knee
trying to sing with him. You must have often wondered why you never saw
anything more of me. Did you think I had forgotten you?”

“I am quite sure I never thought that!”

“You see I was in the Navy at the time,” the Captain resumed; “and we
were ordered away to a foreign station. When I got back to England,
miserable news was waiting for me. I heard of your father’s death and of
that shameful Trial. Poor fellow! He was as innocent, Sydney, as you are
of the offense which he was accused of committing. The first thing I did
was to set inquiries on foot after your mother and her children. It was
some consolation to me to feel that I was rich enough to make your lives
easy and agreeable to you. I thought money could do anything. A serious
mistake, my dear--money couldn’t find the widow and her children. We
supposed you were somewhere in London; and there, to my great grief, it
ended. From time to time--long afterward, when we thought we had got the
clew in our hands--I continued my inquiries, still without success. A
poor woman and her little family are so easily engulfed in the big city!
Years passed (more of them than I like to reckon up) before I heard of
you at last by name. The person from whom I got my information told me
how you were employed, and where.”

“Oh, Captain Bennydeck, who could the person have been?”

“A poor old broken-down actor, Sydney. You were his favorite pupil. Do
you remember him?”

“I should be ungrateful indeed if I could forget him. He was the only
person in the school who was kind to me. Is the good old man still
living?”

“No; he rests at last. I am glad to say I was able to make his last days
on earth the happiest days of his life.”

“I wonder,” Sydney confessed, “how you met with him.”

“There was nothing at all romantic in my first discovery of him. I was
reading the police reports in a newspaper. The poor wretch was brought
before a magistrate, charged with breaking a window. His one last chance
of escaping starvation in the streets was to get sent to prison. The
magistrate questioned him, and brought to light a really heart-breaking
account of misfortune, imbittered by neglect on the part of people in
authority who were bound to help him. He was remanded, so that inquiries
might be made. I attended the court on the day when he appeared there
again, and heard his statement confirmed. I paid his fine, and contrived
to put him in a way of earning a little money. He was very grateful, and
came now and then to thank me. In that way I heard how his troubles had
begun. He had asked for a small advance on the wretched wages that he
received. Can you guess how the schoolmistress answered him?”

“I know but too well how she answered him,” Sydney said; “I was turned
out of the house, too.”

“And I heard of it,” the Captain replied, “from the woman herself.
Everything that could distress me she was ready to mention. She told me
of your mother’s second marriage, of her miserable death, of the poor
boy, your brother, missing, and never heard of since. But when I asked
where you had gone she had nothing more to say. She knew nothing, and
cared nothing, about you. If I had not become acquainted with Mr. Randal
Linley, I might never have heard of you again. We will say no more of
that, and no more of anything that has happened in the past time. From
to-day, my dear, we begin a new life, and (please God) a happier life.
Have you any plans of your own for the future?”

“Perhaps, if I could find help,” Sydney said resignedly, “I might
emigrate. Pride wouldn’t stand in my way; no honest employment would be
beneath my notice. Besides, if I went to America, I might meet with my
brother.”

“My dear child, after the time that has passed, there is no imaginable
chance of your meeting with your brother--and you wouldn’t know each
other again if you did meet. Give up that vain hope and stay here with
me. Be useful and be happy in your own country.”

“Useful?” Sydney repeated sadly. “Your own kind heart, Captain
Bennydeck, is deceiving you. To be useful means, I suppose, to help
others. Who will accept help from me?”

“I will, for one,” the Captain answered.

“You!”

“Yes. You can be of the greatest use to me--you shall hear how.”

He told her of the founding of his Home and of the good it had done.
“You are the very person,” he resumed, “to be the good sister-friend
that I want for my poor girls: _you_ can say for them what they cannot
always say to me for themselves.”

The tears rose in Sydney’s eyes. “It is hard to see such a prospect as
that,” she said, “and to give it up as soon as it is seen.”

“Why give it up?”

“Because I am not fit for it. You are as good as a father to those lost
daughters of yours. If you give them a sister-friend she ought to have
set them a good example. Have I done that? Will they listen to a girl
who is no better than themselves?”

“Gladly! _Your_ sympathy will find its way to their hearts, because it
is animated by something that they can all feel in common--something
nearer and dearer to them than a sense of duty. You won’t consent,
Sydney, for their sakes? Will you do what I ask of you, for my sake?”

She looked at him, hardly able to understand--or, as it might have been,
perhaps afraid to understand him. He spoke to her more plainly.

“I have kept it concealed from you,” he continued--“for why should I lay
my load of suffering on a friend so young as you are, so cruelly tried
already? Let me only say that I am in great distress. If you were with
me, my child, I might be better able to bear it.”

He held out his hand. Even a happy woman could hardly have found it in
her heart to resist him. In silent sympathy and respect, Sydney kissed
the hand that he had offered to her. It was the one way in which she
could trust herself to answer him.

Still encouraging her to see new hopes and new interests in the
future, the good Captain spoke of the share which she might take in the
management of the Home, if she would like to be his secretary. With this
view he showed her some written reports, relating to the institution,
which had been sent to him during the time of his residence at Sydenham.
She read them with an interest and attention which amply justified his
confidence in her capacity.

“These reports,” he explained to her, “are kept for reference; but as
a means of saving time, the substance of them is entered in the daily
journal of our proceedings. Come, Sydney! venture on a first experiment
in your new character. I see pen, ink, and paper on the table; try if
you can shorten one of the reports, without leaving out anything which
it is important to know. For instance, the writer gives reasons for
making his statement. Very well expressed, no doubt, but we don’t want
reasons. Then, again, he offers his own opinion on the right course to
take. Very creditable to him, but I don’t want his opinion--I want his
facts. Take the pen, my secretary, and set down his facts. Never mind
his reflections.”

Proud and pleased, Sydney obeyed him. She had made her little abstract,
and was reading it to him at his request, while he compared it with the
report, when they were interrupted by a visitor. Randal Linley came in,
and noticed the papers on the table with surprise. “Is it possible that
I am interrupting business?” he asked.

Bennydeck answered with the assumed air of importance which was in
itself a compliment to Sydney: “You find me engaged on the business of
the Home with my new secretary.”

Randal at once understood what had happened. He took his friend’s arm,
and led him to the other end of the room.

“You good fellow!” he said. “Add to your kindness by excusing me if I
ask for a word with you in private.”

Sydney rose to retire. After having encouraged her by a word of praise,
the Captain proposed that she should get ready to go out, and should
accompany him on a visit to the Home. He opened the door for her as
respectfully as if the poor girl had been one of the highest ladies in
the land.

“I have seen my friend Sarrazin,” Randal began, “and I have persuaded
him to trust me with Catherine’s present address. I can send Herbert
there immediately, if you will only help me.”

“How can I help you?”

“Will you allow me to tell my brother that your engagement is broken
off?”

Bennydeck shrank from the painful allusion, and showed it.

Randal explained. “I am grieved,” he said, “to distress you by referring
to this subject again. But if my brother is left under the false
impression that your engagement will be followed by your marriage, he
will refuse to intrude himself on the lady who was once his wife.”

The Captain understood. “Say what you please about me,” he replied.
“Unite the father and child--and you may reconcile the husband and
wife.”

“Have you forgotten,” Randal asked, “that the marriage has been
dissolved?”

Bennydeck’s answer ignored the law. “I remember,” he said, “that the
marriage has been profaned.”




Chapter LV. Leave It to the Child.


The front windows of Brightwater Cottage look out on a quiet green lane
in Middlesex, which joins the highroad within a few miles of the market
town of Uxbridge. Through the pretty garden at the back runs a little
brook, winding its merry way to a distant river. The few rooms in this
pleasant place of residence are well (too well) furnished, having regard
to the limits of a building which is a cottage in the strictest sense
of the word. Water-color drawings by the old English masters of the
art ornament the dining-room. The parlor has been transformed into a
library. From floor to ceiling all four of its walls are covered with
books. Their old and well-chosen bindings, seen in the mass, present
nothing less than a feast of color to the eye. The library and the works
of art are described as heirlooms, which have passed into the possession
of the present proprietor--one more among the hundreds of Englishmen who
are ruined every year by betting on the Turf.

So sorely in need of a little ready money was this victim of
gambling--tacitly permitted or conveniently ignored by the audacious
hypocrisy of a country which rejoiced in the extinction of Baden, and
which still shudders at the name of Monaco--that he was ready to let his
pretty cottage for no longer a term than one month certain; and he even
allowed the elderly lady, who drove the hardest of hard bargains with
him, to lessen by one guinea the house-rent paid for each week. He
took his revenge by means of an ironical compliment, addressed to Mrs.
Presty. “What a saving it would be to the country, ma’am, if you were
Chancellor of the Exchequer!” With perfect gravity Mrs. Presty accepted
that well-earned tribute of praise. “You are quite right, sir; I should
be the first official person known to the history of England who took
proper care of the public money.”

Within two days of the time when they had left the hotel at Sydenham,
Catherine and her little family circle had taken possession of the
cottage.

The two ladies were sitting in the library each occupied with a book
chosen from the well-stocked shelves. Catherine’s reading appeared to
be more than once interrupted by Catherine’s thoughts. Noticing this
circumstance, Mrs. Presty asked if some remarkable event had happened,
and if it was weighing heavily on her daughter’s mind.

Catherine answered that she was thinking of Kitty, and that anxiety
connected with the child did weigh heavily on her mind.

Some days had passed (she reminded Mrs. Presty) since the interview at
which Herbert Linley had bidden her farewell. On that occasion he had
referred to her proposed marriage (never to be a marriage now!) in terms
of forbearance and generosity which claimed her sincerest admiration.
It might be possible for her to show a grateful appreciation of his
conduct. Devotedly fond of his little daughter, he must have felt
acutely his long separation from her; and it was quite likely that he
might ask to see Kitty. But there was an obstacle in the way of her
willing compliance with that request, which it was impossible to think
of without remorse, and which it was imperatively necessary to remove.
Mrs. Presty would understand that she alluded to the shameful falsehood
which had led the child to suppose that her father was dead.

Strongly disapproving of the language in which her daughter had done
justice to the conduct of the divorced husband, Mrs. Presty merely
replied: “You are Kitty’s mother; I leave it to you”--and returned to
her reading.

Catherine could not feel that she had deserved such an answer as this.
“Did I plan the deception?” she asked. “Did I tell the lie?”

Mrs. Presty was not in the least offended. “You are comparatively
innocent, my dear,” she admitted, with an air of satirical indulgence.
“You only consented to the deception, and profited by the lie. Suppose
we own the truth? You are afraid.”

Catherine owned the truth in the plainest terms:

“Yes, I _am_ afraid.”

“And you leave it to me?”

“I leave it to you.”

Mrs. Presty complacently closed her book. “I was quite prepared to hear
it,” she said; “all the unpleasant complications since your Divorce--and
Heaven only knows how many of them have presented themselves--have
been left for me to unravel. It so happens--though I was too modest to
mention it prematurely--that I have unraveled _this_ complication. If
one only has eyes to see it, there is a way out of every difficulty
that can possibly happen.” She pushed the book that she had been reading
across the table to Catherine. “Turn to page two hundred and forty,” she
said. “There is the way out.”

The title of the book was “Disasters at Sea”; and the page contained
the narrative of a shipwreck. On evidence apparently irresistible,
the drowning of every soul on board the lost vessel had been taken for
granted--when a remnant of the passengers and crew had been discovered
on a desert island, and had been safely restored to their friends.
Having read this record of suffering and suspense, Catherine looked at
her mother, and waited for an explanation.

“Don’t you see it?” Mrs. Presty asked.

“I can’t say that I do.”

The old lady’s excellent temper was not in the least ruffled, even by
this.

“Quite inexcusable on my part,” she acknowledged; “I ought to have
remembered that you don’t inherit your mother’s vivid imagination. Age
has left me in full possession of those powers of invention which used
to amaze your poor father. He wondered how it was that I never wrote a
novel. Mr. Presty’s appreciation of my intellect was equally sincere;
but he took a different view. ‘Beware, my dear,’ he said, ‘of trifling
with the distinction which you now enjoy: you are one of the most
remarkable women in England--you have never written a novel.’ Pardon
me; I am wandering into the region of literary anecdote, when I ought to
explain myself. Now pray attend to this:--I propose to tell Kitty that I
have found a book which is sure to interest her; and I shall direct her
attention to the lamentable story which you have just read. She is quite
sharp enough (there are sparks of my intellectual fire in Kitty) to
ask if the friends of the poor shipwrecked people were not very much
surprised to see them again. To this I shall answer: ‘Very much, indeed,
for their friends thought they were dead.’ Ah, you dear dull child, you
see it now!”

Catherine saw it so plainly that she was eager to put the first part of
the experiment to an immediate trial.

Kitty was sent for, and made her appearance with a fishing-rod over her
shoulder. “I’m going to the brook,” she announced; “expect some fish for
dinner to-day.”

A wary old hand stopped Catherine, in the act of presenting “Disasters
at Sea,” to Kitty’s notice; and a voice, distinguished by insinuating
kindness, said to the child: “When you have done fishing, my dear, come
to me; I have got a nice book for you to read.--How very absurd of
you, Catherine,” Mrs. Presty continued, when they were alone again, “to
expect the child to read, and draw her own conclusions, while her head
is full of fishing! If there are any fish in the brook, _she_ won’t
catch them. When she comes back disappointed and says: ‘What am I to do
now?’ the ‘Disasters at Sea’ will have a chance. I make it a rule never
to boast; but if there is a thing that I understand, it’s the management
of children. Why didn’t I have a large family?”

Attended by the faithful Susan, Kitty baited her hook, and began to fish
where the waters of the brook were overshadowed by trees.

A little arbor covered by a thatched roof, and having walls of wooden
lattice-work, hidden by creepers climbing over them inside and out,
offered an attractive place of rest on this sheltered side of the
garden. Having brought her work with her, the nursemaid retired to the
summer-house and diligently plied her needle, looking at Kitty from
time to time through the open door. The air was delightfully cool, the
pleasant rippling of the brook fell soothingly on the ear, the seat in
the summer-house received a sitter with the softly-yielding submission
of elastic wires. Susan had just finished her early dinner: in mind and
body alike, this good girl was entirely and deservedly at her ease.
By finely succeeding degrees, her eyelids began to show a tendency
downward; her truant needle-work escaped from her fingers, and lay
lazily on her lap. She snatched it up with a start, and sewed with
severe resolution until her thread was exhausted. The reel was ready at
her side; she took it up for a fresh supply, and innocently rested her
head against the leafy and flowery wall of the arbor. Was it thought
that gradually closed her eyes again? or was it sleep? In either case,
Susan was lost to all sense of passing events; and Susan’s breathing
became musically regular, emulous of the musical regularity of the
brook.

As a lesson in patience, the art of angling pursued in a shallow brook
has its moral uses. Kitty fished, and waited, and renewed the bait and
tried again, with a command of temper which would have been a novelty in
Susan’s experience, if Susan had been awake. But the end which comes to
all things came also to Kitty’s patience. Leaving her rod on the bank,
she let the line and hook take care of themselves, and wandered away in
search of some new amusement.

Lingering here and there to gather flowers from the beds as she passed
them, Kitty was stopped by a shrubbery, with a rustic seat placed near
it, which marked the limits of the garden on that side. The path that
she had been following led her further and further away from the brook,
but still left it well in view. She could see, on her right hand, the
clumsy old wooden bridge which crossed the stream, and served as a means
of communication for the servants and the tradespeople, between the
cottage and the village on the lower ground a mile away.

The child felt hot and tired. She rested herself on the bench, and,
spreading the flowers by her side, began to arrange them in the form of
a nosegay. Still true to her love for Sydney, she had planned to present
the nosegay to her mother, offering the gift as an excuse for returning
to the forbidden subject of her governess, and for asking when they
might hope to see each other again.

Choosing flowers and then rejecting them, trying other colors and
wondering whether she had accomplished a change for the better, Kitty
was startled by the sound of a voice calling to her from the direction
of the brook.

She looked round, and saw a gentleman crossing the bridge. He asked the
way to Brightwater Cottage.

There was something in his voice that attracted her--how or why, at her
age, she never thought of inquiring. Eager and excited, she ran across
the lawn which lay between her and the brook, before she answered the
gentleman’s question.

As they approached each other, his eyes sparkled, his face flushed;
he cried out joyfully, “Here she is!”--and then changed again in an
instant. A horrid pallor overspread his face as the child stood looking
at him with innocent curiosity. He startled Kitty, not because he seemed
to be shocked and distressed, she hardly noticed that; but because he
was so like--although he was thinner and paler and older--oh, so like
her lost father!

“This is the cottage, sir,” she said faintly.

His sorrowful eyes rested kindly on her. And yet, it seemed as if she
had in some way disappointed him. The child ventured to say: “Do you
know me, sir?”

He answered in the saddest voice that Kitty had ever heard: “My little
girl, what makes you think I know you?”

She was at a loss how to reply, fearing to distress him. She could only
say: “You are so like my poor papa.”

He shook and shuddered, as if she had said something to frighten him.
He took her hand. On that hot day, his fingers felt as cold as if it had
been winter time. He led her back to the seat that she had left. “I’m
tired, my dear,” he said. “Shall we sit down?” It was surely true that
he was tired. He seemed hardly able to lift one foot after the other;
Kitty pitied him. “I think you must be ill;” she said, as they took
their places, side by side, on the bench.

“No; not ill. Only weary, and perhaps a little afraid of frightening
you.” He kept her hand in his hand, and patted it from time to time. “My
dear, why did you say ‘_poor_ papa,’ when you spoke of your father just
now?”

“My father is dead, sir.”

He turned his face away from her, and pressed both hands on his breast,
as if he had felt some dreadful pain there, and was trying to hide
it. But he mastered the pain; and he said a strange thing to her--very
gently, but still it was strange. He wished to know who had told her
that her father was dead.

“Grandmamma told me.”

“Do you remember what grandmamma said?”

“Yes--she told me papa was drowned at sea.”

He said something to himself, and said it twice over. “Not her mother!
Thank God, not her mother!” What did he mean?

Kitty looked and looked at him, and wondered and wondered. He put his
arm round her. “Come near to me,” he said. “Don’t be afraid of me, my
dear.” She moved nearer and showed him that she was not afraid. The poor
man seemed hardly to understand her. His eyes grew dim; he sighed like a
person in distress; he said: “Your father would have kissed you, little
one, if he had been alive. You say I am like your father. May I kiss
you?”

She put her hands on his shoulder and lifted her face to him. In the
instant when he kissed her, the child knew him. Her heart beat suddenly
with an overpowering delight; she started back from his embrace. “That’s
how papa used to kiss me!” she cried. “Oh! you _are_ papa! Not drowned!
not drowned!” She flung her arms round his neck, and held him as if she
would never let him go again. “Dear papa! Poor lost papa!” His tears
fell on her face; he sobbed over her. “My sweet darling! my own little
Kitty!”

The hysterical passion that had overcome her father filled her with
piteous surprise. How strange, how dreadful that he should cry--that
he should be so sorry when she was so glad! She took her little
handkerchief out of the pocket of her pinafore, and dried his eyes. “Are
you thinking of the cruel sea, papa? No! the good sea, the kind, bright,
beautiful sea that has given you back to me, and to mamma--!”

They had forgotten her mother!--and Kitty only discovered it now. She
caught at one of her father’s hands hanging helpless at his side, and
pulled at it as if her little strength could force him to his feet.
“Come,” she cried, “and make mamma as happy as I am!”

He hesitated. She sprang on his knee; she pressed her cheek against his
cheek with the caressing tenderness, familiar to him in the first happy
days when she was an infant. “Oh, papa, are you going to be unkind to me
for the first time in your life?”

His momentary resistance was at an end. He was as weak in her hands now
as if he had been the child and she had been the man.

Laughing and singing and dancing round him, Kitty led the way to the
window of the room that opened on the garden. Some one had closed it on
the inner side. She tapped impatiently at the glass. Her mother heard
the tapping; her mother came to the window; her mother ran out to meet
them. Since the miserable time when they left Mount Morven, since the
long unnatural separation of the parents and the child, those three were
together once more!



AFTER THE STORY



1.--The Lawyer’s Apology.


That a woman of my wife’s mature years should be jealous of one of the
most exemplary husbands that the records of matrimony can produce is,
to say the least of it, a discouraging circumstance. A man forgets
that virtue is its own reward, and asks, What is the use of conjugal
fidelity?

However, the motto of married life is (or ought to be): Peace at any
price. I have been this day relieved from the condition of secrecy that
has been imposed on me. You insisted on an explanation some time since.
Here it is at last.

For the ten-thousandth time, my dear, in our joint lives, you are again
right. That letter, marked private, which I received at the domestic
tea-table, was what you positively declared it to be, a letter from a
lady--a charming lady, plunged in the deepest perplexity. We had been
well known to each other for many years, as lawyer and client. She
wanted advice on this occasion also--and wanted it in the strictest
confidence. Was it consistent with my professional duty to show her
letter to my wife? Mrs. Sarrazin says Yes; Mrs. Sarrazin’s husband says
No.

Let me add that the lady was a person of unblemished reputation, and
that she was placed in a false position through no fault of her own.
In plain English, she was divorced. Ah, my dear (to speak in the vivid
language of the people), do you smell a rat?

Yes: my client was Mrs. Norman; and to her pretty cottage in the country
I betook myself the next day. There I found my excellent friend Randal
Linley, present by special invitation.

Stop a minute. Why do I write all this, instead of explaining myself
by word of mouth? My love, you are a member of an old and illustrious
family; you honored me when you married me; and you have (as your father
told me on our wedding day) the high and haughty temper of your race.
I foresee an explosion of this temper, and I would rather have my
writing-paper blown up than be blown up myself.

Is this a cowardly confession on my part? All courage, Mrs. Sarrazin, is
relative; the bravest man living has a cowardly side to his character,
though it may not always be found out. Some years ago, at a public
dinner, I sat next to an officer in the British army. At one time in
his life he had led a forlorn hope. At another time, he had picked up a
wounded soldier, and had carried him to the care of the surgeons through
a hail-storm of the enemy’s bullets. Hot courage and cool courage, this
true hero possessed both. _I_ saw the cowardly side of his character. He
lost his color; perspiration broke out on his forehead; he trembled; he
talked nonsense; he was frightened out of his wits. And all for what?
Because he had to get on his legs and make a speech!

Well: Mrs. Norman, and Randal Linley, and I, sat down to our
consultation at the cottage.

What did my fair client want?

She contemplated marrying for the second time, and she wanted my advice
as a lawyer, and my encouragement as an old friend. I was quite ready; I
only waited for particulars. Mrs. Norman became dreadfully embarrassed,
and said: “I refer you to my brother-in-law.”

I looked at Randal. “Once her brother-in-law, no doubt,” I said; “but
after the Divorce--” My friend stopped me there. “After the Divorce,” he
remarked, “I may be her brother-in-law again.”

If this meant anything, it meant that she was actually going to marry
Herbert Linley again. This was too ridiculous. “If it’s a joke,” I said,
“I have heard better fun in my time. If it’s only an assertion, I don’t
believe it.”

“Why not?” Randal asked.

“Saying I do want you, in one breath--and I don’t want you, in
another--seems to be a little hard on Divorce,” I ventured to suggest.

“Don’t expect _me_ to sympathize with Divorce,” Randal said.

I answered that smartly. “No; I’ll wait till you are married.”

He took it seriously. “Don’t misunderstand me,” he replied. “Where there
is absolute cruelty, or where there is deliberate desertion, on the
husband’s part, I see the use and the reason for Divorce. If the unhappy
wife can find an honorable man who will protect her, or an honorable man
who will offer her a home, Society and Law, which are responsible for
the institution of marriage, are bound to allow a woman outraged
under the shelter of their institution to marry again. But, where the
husband’s fault is sexual frailty, I say the English law which refuses
Divorce on that ground alone is right, and the Scotch law which grants
it is wrong. Religion, which rightly condemns the sin, pardons it on the
condition of true penitence. Why is a wife not to pardon it for the
same reason? Why are the lives of a father, a mother, and a child to be
wrecked, when those lives may be saved by the exercise of the first of
Christian virtues--forgiveness of injuries? In such a case as this I
regret that Divorce exists; and I rejoice when husband and wife and
child are one flesh again, re-united by the law of Nature, which is the
law of God.”

I might have disputed with him; but I thought he was right. I also
wanted to make sure of the facts. “Am I really to understand,” I asked,
“that Mr. Herbert Linley is to be this lady’s husband for the second
time?”

“If there is no lawful objection to it,” Randal said--“decidedly Yes.”

My good wife, in all your experience you never saw your husband stare
as he stared at that moment. Here was a lady divorced by her own lawful
desire and at her own personal expense, thinking better of it after no
very long interval, and proposing to marry the man again. Was there ever
anything so grossly improbable? Where is the novelist who would be bold
enough to invent such an incident as this?

Never mind the novelist. How did it end?

Of course it could only end in one way, so far as I was concerned. The
case being without precedent in my experience, I dropped my professional
character at the outset. Speaking next as a friend, I had only to say
to Mrs. Norman: “The Law has declared you and Mr. Herbert Linley to be
single people. Do what other single people do. Buy a license, and give
notice at a church--and by all means send wedding cards to the judge who
divorced you.”

Said; and, in another fortnight, done. Mr. and Mrs. Herbert Linley were
married again this morning; and Randal and I were the only witnesses
present at the ceremony, which was strictly private.



2.--The Lawyer’s Defense.



I wonder whether the foregoing pages of my writing-paper have been torn
to pieces and thrown into the waste-paper basket? You wouldn’t litter
the carpet. No. I may be torn in pieces, but I do you justice for all
that.

What are the objections to the divorced husband and wife becoming
husband and wife again? Mrs. Presty has stated them in the following
order. Am I wrong in assuming that, on this occasion at least, you will
agree with Mrs. Presty?

First Objection: Nobody has ever done such a thing before.

Second Objection: Penitent or not penitent, Mr. Herbert Linley doesn’t
deserve it.

Third Objection: No respectable person will visit them.

First Reply: The question is not whether the thing has been done before,
but whether the doing of the thing is right in itself There is no clause
in the marriage service forbidding a wife to forgive her husband; but
there is a direct prohibition to any separation between them. It is,
therefore, not wrong to forgive Mr. Herbert Linley, and it is absolutely
right to marry him again.

Second Reply: When their child brings him home, and takes it for granted
that her father and mother should live together, _because_ they are her
father and mother, innocent Kitty has appealed from the Law of Divorce
to the Law of Nature. Whether Herbert Linley has deserved it or whether
he has not, there he is in the only fit place for him--and there is an
end of the second objection.

Third Reply: A flat contradiction to the assertion that no respectable
person will visit her. Mrs. Sarrazin will visit her. Yes, you will, my
dear! Not because I insist upon it--Do I ever insist on anything?
No; you will act on your own responsibility, out of compassion for a
misguided old woman. Judge for yourself when you read what follows, if
Mrs. Presty is not sadly in need of the good example of an ornament to
her sex.

The Evil Genius of the family joined us in the cottage parlor when our
consultations had come to an end. I had the honor of communicating the
decision at which we had arrived. Mrs. Presty marched to the door; and,
from that commanding position, addressed a few farewell remarks to her
daughter.

“I have done with you, Catherine. You have reached the limits of my
maternal endurance at last. I shall set up my own establishment, and
live again--in memory--with Mr. Norman and Mr. Presty. May you be happy.
I don’t anticipate it.”

She left the room--and came back again for a last word, addressed this
time to Randal Linley.

“When you next see your friend, Captain Bennydeck, give him my
compliments, Mr. Randal, and say I congratulate him on having been
jilted by my daughter. It would have been a sad thing, indeed, if such a
sensible man had married an idiot. Good-morning.”

She left the room again, and came back again for another last word,
addressed on this occasion to me. Her better nature made an effort to
express itself, not altogether without success.

“I think it is quite likely, Mr. Sarrazin, that some dreadful misfortune
will fall on my daughter, as the punishment of her undutiful disregard
of her mother’s objections. In that case, I shall feel it my duty to
return and administer maternal consolation. When you write, address me
at my banker’s. I make allowances for a lawyer, sir; I don’t blame You.”

She opened the door for the third time--stepped out, and stepped back
again into the room--suddenly gave her daughter a fierce
kiss--returned to the door--shook her fist at Mrs. Linley with a
theatrically-threatening gesture--said, “Unnatural child!”--and, after
this exhibition of her better nature, and her worse, left us at last.
When you visit the remarried pair on their return from their second
honeymoon, take Mrs. Presty with you.



3.--The Lawyer’s Last Word.


“When you force this ridiculous and regrettable affair on my attention”
 (I think I hear Mrs. Sarrazin say), “the least you can do is to make
your narrative complete. But perhaps you propose to tell me personally
what has become of Kitty, and what well-deserved retribution has
overtaken Miss Westerfield.”

No: I propose in this case also to communicate my information in
writing--at the safe distance from home of Lincoln’s Inn Fields.

Kitty accompanies her father and mother to the Continent, of course. But
she insisted on first saying good-by to the dear friend, once the dear
governess, whom she loves. Randal and I volunteered to take her (with
her mother’s ready permission) to see Miss Westerfield. Try not to be
angry. Try not to tear me up.

We found Captain Bennydeck and his pretty secretary enjoying a little
rest and refreshment, after a long morning’s work for the good of the
Home. The Captain was carving the chicken; and Sydney, by his side, was
making the salad. The house-cat occupied a third chair, with her eyes
immovably fixed on the movements of the knife and fork. Perhaps I was
thinking of sad past days. Anyway, it seemed to me to be as pretty a
domestic scene as a man could wish to look at. The arrival of Kitty made
the picture complete.

Our visit was necessarily limited by a due remembrance of the hour of
departure, by an early tidal train. Kitty’s last words to Sydney bade
her bear their next meeting in mind, and not be melancholy at only
saying good-by for a time. Like all children, she asks strange
questions. When we were out in the street again, she said to her uncle:
“Do you think my nice Captain will marry Syd?”

Randal had noticed, in Captain Bennydeck’s face, signs which betrayed
that the bitterest disappointment of his life was far from being a
forgotten disappointment yet. If it had been put by any other person,
poor Kitty’s absurd question might have met with a bitter reply. As it
was, her uncle only said: “My dear child, that is no business of yours
or mine.”

Not in the least discouraged, Kitty turned to me. “What do _you_ think,
Samuel?”

I followed Randal’s lead, and answered, “How should I know?”

The child looked from one to the other of us. “Shall I tell you what I
think?” she said, “I think you are both of you humbugs.”





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Evil Genius, by Wilkie Collins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EVIL GENIUS ***

***** This file should be named 1627-0.txt or 1627-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/2/1627/

Produced by James Rusk

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
