The Iliad of Homer~~~﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer (1873), by Homer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Iliad of Homer (1873)

Author: Homer

Translator: Theodore Alois Buckley

Release Date: August 23, 2007 [EBook #22382]
Last updated: December 8, 2012

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER (1873) ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Rénald Lévesque and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net.







[Illustration: Homer by Hinchliff]

                                 THE
                           ILIAD OF HOMER,


                       Literally Translated,
                      WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES.

                                 BY

                   THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY, B.A.
                         OF CHRIST CHURCH.


                              LONDON:
          BELL AND DALDY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                               1873.

    LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
                        AND CHARING CROSS.




                             PREFACE.


The present translation of the Iliad will, it is hoped, be found to
convey, more accurately than any which has preceded it, the words and
thoughts of the original. It is based upon a careful examination of
whatever has been contributed by scholars of every age towards the
elucidation of the text, including the ancient scholiasts and
lexicographers, the exegetical labours of Barnes and Clarke, and the
elaborate criticisms of Heyne, Wolf, and their successors.

The necessary brevity of the notes has prevented the full discussion of
many passages where there is great room for difference of opinion, and
hence several interpretations are adopted without question, which, had
the editor's object been to write a critical commentary, would have
undergone a more lengthened examination. The same reason has compelled
him, in many instances, to substitute references for extracts,
indicating rather than quoting those storehouses of information, from
whose abundant contents he would gladly have drawn more copious
supplies. Among the numerous works to which he has had recourse, the
following deserve particular mention-Alberti's invaluable edition of
Hesychius, the Commentary of Eustathius, and Buttmann's Lexilogus.

In the succeeding volume, the Odyssey, Hymns, and minor poems will be
produced in a similar manner.


THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY,
_Ch. Ch., Oxford._




                        THE ILIAD OF HOMER.




                          BOOK THE FIRST.


                             ARGUMENT.

Apollo, enraged at the insult offered to his priest, Chryses, sends a
pestilence upon the Greeks. A council is called, and Agamemnon, being
compelled to restore the daughter of Chryses, whom he had taken from
him, in revenge deprives Achilles of Hippodameia. Achilles resigns her,
but refuses to aid the Greeks in battle, and at his request, his mother,
Thetis, petitions Jove to honour her offended son at the expense of the
Greeks. Jupiter, despite the opposition of Juno, grants her request.


Sing, O goddess, the destructive wrath of Achilles, son of Peleus, which
brought countless woes upon the Greeks,[1] and hurled many valiant souls
of heroes down to Hades, and made themselves[2] a prey to dogs and to
all birds [but the will of Jove was being accomplished], from the time
when Atrides, king of men, and noble Achilles, first contending, were
disunited.

   [Footnote 1: Although, as Ernesti observes, the verb προίαψεν
   does not necessarily contain the idea of a _premature_ death, yet
   the ancient interpreters are almost unanimous in understanding it
   so. Thus Eustathius, p. 13, ed. Bas.: μετὰ βλάζης είς Αιδην πρὁ
   το δέοντος ἔπεμφεν, ὡς τῆς προθέσεως (_i.e._ προ) καιρικόν τι
   δηλούσης, ἢ ἁπλὡς ἔπεμψεν, ώς πλεοναζούσης τἤς προθέσεως. Hesych.
   t. ii. p. 1029, s. ν.: προίαψεν--δηλοῖ δε διὰ τἤς λέξεως τὴν μετ'
   ỏδὑνης αὐτῶν ἀπώλειαν. Cf. Virg. Æn. xii. 952: "Vitaque cum
   gemitu fugit _indignata_ sub umbras," where Servius well
   observes, "quia discedebat a juvene: nam volunt philosophi,
   invitam animam discedere a corpore, cum quo adhuc habitare
   legibus naturæ poterat." I have, however, followed Ernesti, with
   the later commentators.]

   [Footnote 2: _I.e._ their bodies. Cf. Æ. i. 44, vi. 362, where
   there is a similar sense of the pronoun.]

Which, then, of the gods, engaged these two in strife, so that they
should fight?[3] The son of Latona and Jove; for he, enraged with the
king, stirred up an evil pestilence through the army [and the people
kept perishing][4]; because the son of Atreus had dishonoured the
priest Chryses: for he came to the swift ships of the Greeks to ransom
his daughter, and bringing invaluable ransoms, having in his hands the
fillets of far-darting Apollo on his golden sceptre. And he supplicated
all the Greeks, but chiefly the two sons of Atreus, the leaders of the
people:

"Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other well-greaved Greeks, to you indeed may
the gods, possessing the heavenly dwellings, grant to destroy the city
of Priam, and to return home safely: but for me, liberate my beloved
daughter, and accept the ransoms, reverencing the son of Jove,
far-darting Apollo."

   [Footnote 3: Rut see Anthon.]

   [Footnote 4: Observe the full force of the imperfect tense.]

Upon this, all the other Greeks shouted assent, that the priest should
be reverenced, and the splendid ransoms accepted; yet was it not
pleasing in his mind to Agamemnon, son of Atreus; but he dismissed him
evilly, and added a harsh mandate:

"Let me not find thee, old man, at the hollow barks, either now
loitering, or hereafter returning, lest the staff and fillet of the god
avail thee not.[5] For her I will not set free; sooner shall old age
come upon her, at home in Argos, far away from her native land, employed
in offices of the loom, and preparing[6] my bed. But away! irritate me
not, that thou mayest return the safer."

   [Footnote 5: Of χραισμεῖν, Buttmann, Lexil. p. 546, observes that
   "it is never found in a positive sense, but remained in ancient
   usage in negative sentences only; as, '_it is of no use to
   thee_,' or, '_it helps thee not_,' and similar expressions."]

   [Footnote 6: The old mistake of construing ἀντιόωσαν "sharing,"
   which still clings to the translations, is exploded by Buttm.
   Lex. p. 144. Eust. and Heysch. both give εὺτρεπίζονσαν as one of
   the interpretations; and that such is the right one is evident
   from the collateral phrase πορσύνειν λέχος in Od. iii. 403.
   Λμφιζέζηκας is the perfect tense, but with the force of the
   present.]

Thus he spoke; but the old man was afraid, and obeyed the command. And
he went in silence along the shore of the loud-resounding sea; but then,
going apart, the aged man prayed much to king Apollo, whom fair-haired
Latona bore:

"Hear me, god of the silver bow, who art wont to protect Chrysa and
divine Cilla, and who mightily rulest over Tenedos: O Sminthius,[7] if
ever I have roofed[8] thy graceful temple, or if, moreover, at any time
I have burned to thee the fat thighs of bulls or of goats, accomplish
this entreaty for me. Let the Greeks pay for my tears, by thy arrows."

   [Footnote 7: An epithet derived from σμίνθος, the Phrygian name
   for a _mouse_: either because Apollo had put an end to a plague
   of mice among that people, or because a mouse was thought
   emblematical of augury.--Grote, Hist. of Greece, vol. i. p. 68,
   observes that this "worship of Sminthian Apollo, in various parts
   of the Troad and its neighbouring territory, dates before the
   earliest period of Æolic colonization." On the Homeric
   description of Apollo, see Müller, Dorians, vol. i. p. 315.]

   [Footnote 8: Not "crowned," as Heyne says; for this was a later
   custom.--See Anthon and Arnold.]

Thus he spoke praying; but to him Phoebus Apollo hearkened. And he
descended from the summits of Olympus, enraged in heart, having upon his
shoulders his bow and quiver covered on all sides. But as he moved, the
shafts rattled forthwith[9] upon the shoulders of him enraged; but he
went along like unto the night. Then he sat down apart from the ships,
and sent among them an arrow, and terrible arose the clang of the silver
bow. First he attacked the mules, and the swift[10] dogs; but afterwards
despatching a pointed arrow against [the Greeks] themselves, he smote
them, and frequent funeral-piles of the dead were continually burning.
Nine days through the army went the arrows of the god; but on the tenth,
Achilles called the people to an assembly; for to his mind the
white-armed goddess Juno had suggested it; for she was anxious
concerning the Greeks, because she saw them perishing. But when they
accordingly were assembled, and were met together, swift-footed
Achilles, rising up amidst them, [thus] spoke:

"O son of Atreus! now do I think that we would consent to return, having
been defeated in our purpose, if we should but escape death, since at
the same time[11] war and pestilence subdue the Greeks. But come now,
let us consult some prophet, or priest, or even one who is informed by
dreams (for dream also is from Jove),[12] who would tell us on what
account Phoebus Apollo is so much enraged with us: whether he blames us
on account of a vow [unperformed], or a hecatomb [unoffered]; and
whether haply he may be willing, having partaken of the savour of lambs
and unblemished goats, to avert from us the pestilence."

   [Footnote 9: The force of ἄρα is noticed by Nägelsbach.]

   [Footnote 10: Or "white." Hesych. ταχεῖς, λευκούς.]

   [Footnote 11: Ammonius, p. 14, foolishly supposes that ἁμοῦ here
   denotes place, ἰν Τροίᾳ. Valcknaer justly supports the ordinary
   interpretation.]

   [Footnote 12: Cf. Plin. Ep. i. 18, and Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 3,
   sq.]

He indeed, thus having spoken, sat down; but to them there arose by far
the best of augurs, Calchas, son of Thestor, who knew the present, the
future, and the past,[13] and who guided the ships of the Greeks to
Ilium, by his prophetic art, which Phoebus Apollo gave him, who, being
well disposed,[14] addressed them, and said:

"O Achilles, dear to Jove, thou biddest me to declare the wrath of
Apollo, the far-darting king. Therefore will I declare it; but do thou
on thy part covenant, and swear to me, that thou wilt promptly assist me
in word and hand. For methinks I shall irritate a man who widely rules
over all the Argives, and whom the Greeks obey. For a king is more
powerful[15] when he is enraged with an inferior man; for though he may
repress his wrath[16] for that same day, yet he afterwards retains his
anger in his heart, until he accomplishes it; but do thou consider
whether thou wilt protect me."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed: "Taking full
confidence, declare the divine oracle, whatsoever thou knowest. For, by
Apollo, dear to Jove, to whom thou, praying, O Calchas, dost disclose
predictions to the Greeks, no one of all the Greeks, while I am alive
and have sight upon the earth, shall lay heavy hands upon thee at the
hollow ships; not even if thou wast to name Agamemnon, who now boasts
himself to be much the most powerful of the Greeks." [17]

   [Footnote 13: A common formula in the ancient poets to express
   the eternity of things. Empedocles apud Pseud. Arist. de Mundo:
   Πάνθ' ὅσα τ' ὴν, ὅσα τ' εστὶ, καὶ ὄσσα τε ἔσται ὀπίσσω. Virg.
   Georg. iv. 392: "Novit namque omnia vates, Quæ sint, quæ fuerint,
   quæ mox ventura trahantur".]

   [Footnote 14: See Abresch. on Æschyl. p. 287. Ernesti.]

   [Footnote 15: ἀγανακτοῦσί γἀρ διὰ τὴν ὑπεροχήν. A--rist. Rhet.
   ii. 2, quoting this verse.]

   [Footnote 16: Lit. "digest his bile". Homer's distinction between
   χόλος and κότος is observed by Nemesius, de Nat. Hom. § 21.]

   [Footnote 17: I have used "Greeks" wherever the whole army is
   evidently meant. In other instances I have retained the specific
   names of the different confederate nations.]

And upon this, the blameless prophet then took confidence, and spoke:
"Neither is he enraged on account of a vow [unperformed], nor of a
hecatomb [unoffered], but on account of his priest, whom Agamemnon
dishonoured; neither did he liberate his daughter, nor did he receive
her ransom. Wherefore has the Far-darter given woes, and still will he
give them; nor will he withhold his heavy hands from the pestilence,
before that [Agamemnon] restore to her dear father the bright-eyed[18]
maid, unpurchased, unransomed, and conduct a sacred hecatomb to Chrysa;
then, perhaps, having appeased, we might persuade him."

   [Footnote 18: See Arnold.]

He indeed, having thus spoken, sat down. But to them arose the hero, the
son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon,[19] agitated; and his all-gloomy
heart was greatly filled with wrath, and his eyes were like unto
gleaming fire. Sternly regarding Calchas most of all, he addressed
[him]:

"Prophet of ills, not at any time hast thou spoken anything good for me;
but evils are always gratifying to thy soul to prophesy,[20] and never
yet hast thou offered one good word, nor accomplished [one]. And now,
prophesying amongst the Greeks, thou haranguest that forsooth the
Far-darter works griefs to them upon this account, because I was
unwilling to accept the splendid ransom of the virgin daughter of
Chryses, since I much prefer to have her at home; and my reason is, I
prefer her even to Clytemnestra, my lawful wife; for she is not inferior
to her, either in person, or in figure, or in mind, or by any means in
accomplishments. But even thus I am willing to restore her, if it be
better; for I wish the people to be safe rather than to perish. But do
thou immediately prepare a prize for me, that I may not alone, of the
Argives, be without a prize; since it is not fitting. For ye all see
this, that my prize is going elsewhere."

   [Footnote 19: "In the assembly of the people, as in the courts of
   justice, the nobles alone speak, advise, and decide, whilst the
   people merely listen to their ordinances and decisions, in order
   to regulate their own conduct accordingly; being suffered,
   indeed, to follow the natural impulse of evincing, to a certain
   extent, their approbation or disapprobation of their superiors,
   but without any legal means of giving validity to their opinion."
   Müller, Gk. Lit. p. 30.]

   [Footnote 20: But we must not join μαντεύεσθαι with
   κικά.--Nägelsbach.]

But him swift-footed godlike Achilles then answered: "Most noble son of
Atreus, most avaricious of all! for how shall the magnanimous Greeks
assign thee a prize? Nor do we know of many common stores laid up
anywhere. But what we plundered[21] from the cities, these have been
divided, and it is not fitting that the troops should collect these
brought together again. But do thou now let her go to the God, and we
Greeks will compensate thee thrice, or four-fold, if haply Jove grant to
us to sack the well-fortified city of Troy."

   [Footnote 21: More closely: "took from the cities, when we
   destroyed them."]

But him answering, king Agamemnon addressed: "Do not thus, excellent
though thou be, godlike Achilles, practise deceit in thy mind; since
thou shalt not overreach, nor yet persuade me. Dost thou wish that thou
thyself mayest have a prize, whilst I sit down idly,[22] wanting one?
And dost thou bid me to restore her? If, however, the magnanimous Greeks
will give me a prize, having suited it to my mind, so that it shall be
an equivalent, [it is well]. But if they will not give it, then I myself
coming, will seize your prize, or that of Ajax,[23] or Ulysses,[24] and
will bear it away; and he to whom I may come shall have cause for anger.
On these things, however, we will consult afterwards. But now come, let
us launch a sable ship into the boundless sea, and let us collect into
it rowers in sufficient number, and place on board a hecatomb; and let
us make the fair-cheeked daughter of Chryses to embark, and let some one
noble man be commander, Ajax or Idomeneus, or divine Ulysses; or
thyself, son of Peleus, most terrible of all men, that thou mayest
appease for us the Far-darter, having offered sacrifices."

   [Footnote 22: Buttmann would take αὔτως as = frustra.]

   [Footnote 23: Tecmessa.]

   [Footnote 24: Laodice, daughter of Cyenus.]

But him swift-footed Achilles sternly regarding, addressed: "Ha![25]
thou clad in impudence, thou bent on gain, how can any of the Greeks
willingly obey thy orders, either to undertake a mission, or to fight
bravely with men? For I did not come hither to fight on account of the
warlike Trojans, seeing that they are blameless as respects me. Since
they have never driven away my oxen, nor my horses either nor ever
injured my crops in fertile and populous Phthia: for very many shadowy
mountains, and the resounding sea, are between us. But thee, O most
shameless man, we follow, that thou mayest rejoice; seeking satisfaction
from the Trojans for Menelaus, and for thy pleasure, shameless one! for
which things thou hast neither respect nor care. And now thou hast
threatened that thou wilt in person wrest from me my prize, for which I
have toiled much, and which the sons of the Greeks have given me.
Whenever the Greeks sacked a well-inhabited city of the Trojans, I never
have had a prize equal to thine; although my hands perform the greater
portion of the tumultuous conflict, yet when the division [of spoil] may
come, a much greater prize is given to thee, while I come to my ships,
when I am fatigued with fighting, having one small and agreeable. But
now I will go to Phthia, for it is much better to return home with our
curved ships; for I do not think that thou shalt amass wealth and
treasures while I am dishonoured here."

   [Footnote 25: See my note on Od. i. p. 2, n. 11, ed. Bohn.]

But him, the king of men, Agamemnon, then answered: "Fly, by all means,
if thy mind urges thee; nor will I entreat thee to remain on my account:
there are others with me who will honour me, but chiefly the all-wise
Jove. For to me thou art the most odious of the Jove-nourished princes,
for ever is contention agreeable to thee, and wars and battles. If thou
be very bold, why doubtless a deity has given this to thee. Going home
with thy ships and thy companions, rule over the Myrmidons; for I do not
regard thee, nor care for thee in thy wrath; but thus will I threaten
thee: Since Phoebus Apollo is depriving me of the daughter of
Chryses,[26] her indeed I will send, with my own ship, and with my own
friends; but I myself, going to thy tent, will lead away the
fair-cheeked daughter of Brises,[27] thy prize; that thou mayest well
know how much more powerful I am than thou, and that another may dread
to pronounce himself equal to me, and to liken himself openly [to me]."

   [Footnote 26: Astynome. Cf. Eustath. fol. 58]

   [Footnote 27: Hippodameia.]

Thus he spoke, and grief arose to the son of Peleus, and the heart
within, in his hairy breast, was pondering upon two courses; whether,
drawing his sharp sword from his thigh, he should dismiss them,[28] and
should kill the son of Atreus, or should put a stop to his wrath, and
restrain his passion. While he was thus pondering in his heart and soul,
and was drawing his mighty sword from the scabbard, came Minerva from
heaven; for her the white-armed goddess Juno had sent forward, equally
loving and regarding both from her soul. And she stood behind, and
caught the son of Peleus by his yellow hair, appearing to him alone; but
none of the others beheld her. But Achilles was amazed, and turned
himself round, and immediately recognized Pallas Minerva; and
awe-inspiring her eyes appeared to him. And addressing her, he spoke
winged words:

"Why, O offspring of ægis-bearing Jove, hast thou come hither? Is it
that thou mayest witness the insolence of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus?
But I tell thee, what I think will be accomplished, that he will
probably soon lose his life by his haughtiness."

   [Footnote 28: The princes assembled.]

But him in turn the azure-eyed goddess Minerva addressed: "I came from
heaven to assuage thy wrath, if thou wilt obey me; for the white-armed
goddess Juno sent me forward, equally loving and regarding both from her
soul. But come, cease from strife, nor draw the sword with thine hand.
But reproach by words, as the occasion may suggest; for thus I declare,
and it shall be accomplished, that thrice as many splendid gifts shall
be presented to thee, because of this insolent act; only restrain
thyself, and obey us."

But her answering,[29] swift-footed Achilles addressed: "It behoves me
to observe the command of you both, O goddess, although much enraged in
my soul; for so it is better. Whosoever obeys the gods, to him they
hearken propitiously."

   [Footnote 29: Columna on Ennius, p. 17, ed. Hessel., compares
   "Ollei respondet Rex Albaï longaï," and "Ollei respondet suavis
   sonus Egeriäi," observing that this formula was probably as
   common in the heroic annals of Ennius as τὸν δ' ὰπαμειξόμενος is
   in Homer.]

He spoke, and held still his heavy hand upon the silvery hilt, and
thrust back the great sword into the scabbard, nor did he disobey the
mandate of Minerva; but she had gone to Olympus, to the mansions of
ægis-bearing Jove, amongst the other deities. But the son of Peleus
again addressed Atrides with injurious[30] words, nor as yet ceased from
anger:

"Wine-bibber, having the countenance of a dog, but the heart of a stag,
never hast thou at any time dared in soul to arm thyself with the
people for war, nor to go to ambuscade with the chiefs of the Greeks;
for this always appears to thee to be death. Certainly it is much better
through the wide army of the Achæans, to take away the rewards of
whoever may speak against thee. A people-devouring king [art thou],
since thou rulest over fellows of no account; for assuredly, son of
Atreus, thou [otherwise] wouldst have insulted now for the last time.
But I will tell thee, and I will further swear a great oath: yea, by
this sceptre, which will never bear leaves and branches, nor will bud
again, after it has once left its trunk on the mountains; for the axe
has lopped it all around of its leaves and bark; but now the sons of the
Greeks, the judges, they who protect the laws [received] from Jove, bear
it in their hands; and this will be a great oath to thee; surely will a
longing desire for Achilles come upon all the sons of the Achæans at
some future day, and thou, although much grieved, wilt be unable to
assist them, when many dying shall fall by the hand of man-slaying
Hector. Then enraged, wilt thou inwardly fret thy soul, that thou didst
in no way honour the bravest of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 30: Epimerism. Hom. in Cramer's Anecdott. vol. i. p.
   24. άταρτηρός, η παρά την άτην, ο σημαίνει την βλάξην,
   άτηρός.--Hesych. βλαξρός, άτηρός.]

Thus spoke the son of Peleus; and he cast upon the earth his sceptre
studded with golden nails, and sat down. But on the other hand, the son
of Atreus was enraged; therefore to them arose the sweet-voiced
Nestor,[31] the harmonious orator of the Pylians, from whose tongue
flowed language sweeter than honey. During his life two generations of
articulately-speaking men had become extinct, who, formerly, were reared
and lived with him in divine Pylus, but he was now ruling over the
third; who, wisely counselling, addressed them, and said:

   [Footnote 31: I must refer the reader to a most happy sketch of
   Nestor's exploits and character in Crete's Hist, of Greece, vol.
   i. p. 153.]

"O gods! surely a great sorrow comes upon the Grecian land. Verily,
Priam would exult, and the sons of Priam, and the other Trojans, would
greatly rejoice in their souls, if they were to hear these things of you
twain contending: you who in council and in fighting surpass the Greeks.
But be persuaded; for ye are both younger than I am. For already, in
former times, I have associated with men braver than you, and they
never disdained me. I never saw, nor shall I see, such men as Pirithous,
and Dryas, shepherd of the people, and Cæneus, and Exadius, and god-like
Polyphemus,[32] and Theseus, the son of Ægeus, like unto the immortals.
Bravest indeed were they trained up of earthly men; bravest they were,
and they fought with the bravest Centaurs of the mountain caves, and
terribly slew them. With these was I conversant, coming from Pylus, far
from the Apian land; for they invited me, and I fought to the best of my
power; but with them none of these who now are mortals upon the earth
could fight. And even they heard my counsels, and obeyed my words. But
do ye also obey, since it is better to be obedient; nor do thou,
although being powerful, take away the maid from him, but leave it so,
seeing that the sons of the Greeks first gave [her as] a prize on him.
Nor do thou, O son of Peleus, feel inclined to contend against the king;
since never yet has any sceptre-bearing king, to whom Jove has given
glory, been allotted an equal share of dignity. But though thou be of
superior strength, and a goddess mother has given thee birth, yet he is
superior in power, inasmuch as he rules more people. Do thou, son of
Atreus, repress thine anger; for it is I that[33] entreat thee to forego
thy resentment on behalf of Achilles, who is the great bulwark of
destructive war to all the Achæans."

   [Footnote 32: A prince of the Lapithæ, not the Cyclops.]

   [Footnote 33: See Anthon, who has well remarked the force of the
   particles.]

But him king Agamemnon answering addressed: "Of a truth thou hast said
all these things, old man, according to what is right. But this man is
desirous to be above all other men; he wishes to have the mastery, and
lord it over all, and to prescribe to all; with which his desires I
think some one will not comply. But if the ever-existing gods have made
him a warrior, do they therefore give him the right to utter insults?"

But him noble Achilles interruptingly answered: "Yea, forsooth,[34] I
may be called a coward and a man of no worth, if now I yield to thee in
everything, whatever thou mayest say. Enjoin these things to other men;
for dictate not to me, for I think that I shall no longer obey thee. But
another thing will I tell thee, and do thou store it in thy mind: I
will not contend with my hands, neither with thee, nor with others, on
account of this maid, since ye, the donors, take her away. But of the
other effects, which I have at my swift black ship, of those thou shalt
not remove one, taking them away, I being unwilling. But if [thou wilt],
come, make trial, that these also may know: quickly shall thy black
blood flow around my lance."

   [Footnote 34: Properly elliptical--_I have done right; for_,
   &c.--Crusius.]

Thus these twain, striving with contrary words, arose, and they broke up
the assembly at the ships of the Greeks. The son of Peleus on his part
repaired to his tents and well-proportioned[35] ships, with the son of
Menoetius,[36] and his companions. But the son of Atreus[37] launched
his swift ship into the sea, and selected and put into it twenty rowers,
and embarked a hecatomb for the god. And he led the fair daughter of
Chryses and placed her on board, and the very wise Ulysses embarked as
conductor. They then embarking, sailed over the watery paths. But the
son of Atreus ordered the armies to purify themselves;[38] and they were
purified, and cast forth the ablutions into the sea. And they sacrificed
to Apollo perfect hecatombs of bulls and goats, along the shore of the
barren sea; and the savour involved in[39] smoke ascended to heaven.
Thus were they employed in these things through the army. Nor did
Agamemnon cease from the contention which at first he threatened against
Achilles. But he thus addressed Talthybius and Eurybates, who were his
heralds and zealous attendants:[40]

   [Footnote 35: Equal on both sides, so as to preserve a balance.
   But Blomfield, Obs. on Matth. Gr. § 124, prefers to render it
   "ships of due size," as [δαις ειση], ver. 468, "an equalized
   meal."]

   [Footnote 36: Patroclus.]

   [Footnote 37: So Anthon, comparing ver. 142.]

   [Footnote 38: Not a mere medicinal measure, but a symbolical
   putting away of the guilt, which, through Agamemnon's
   transgression, was brought upon the army also.--Wolf.]

   [Footnote 39: Not _about_ the smoke, but _in_ the smoke; for περί
   denotes also the staying within the compass of an
   object.--Nägelsbach.]

   [Footnote 40: θεράπων is a voluntary servant, as opposed to
   δούλος.--See Arnold.]

"Going to the tent of Achilles, the son of Peleus, lead away fair
Brisëis, having taken her by the hand; but if he will not give her, then
I myself, coming with great numbers, will take her, and this will be
more grievous[41] to him."

Thus speaking, he despatched them, having added[42] a harsh command. But
they reluctantly went along the shore of the barren sea, and came to the
tents and ships of the Myrmidons. And they found him sitting at his tent
and his black ship: nor did Achilles, seeing them, rejoice. But they,
confused, and reverencing the king, stood still, nor addressed him at
all, nor spoke [their bidding]. But he perceived [it] in his mind, and
said:

"Hail, heralds, messengers of Jove,[43] and also of men, come near, for
ye are not blamable to me in the least, but Agamemnon, who has sent you
on account of the maid Brisëis. However, come, noble Patroclus, lead
forth the maid, and give her to them to conduct; but let these be
witnesses [of the insult offered me], both before the blessed gods, and
before mortal men, and before the merciless king. But if ever again
there shall be need of me to avert unseemly destruction from the rest,
[appeal to me shall be in vain],[44] for surely he rages with an
infatuated mind, nor knows at all how to view the future and the past,
in order that the Greeks may fight in safety at their ships."

Thus he spoke. And Patroclus obeyed his dear companion, and led forth
fair-cheeked Brisëis from the tent, and gave her to them to conduct; and
they returned along by the ships of the Greeks. But the woman went with
them reluctantly, whilst Achilles, weeping,[45] immediately sat down,
removed apart from his companions, upon the shore of the hoary sea,
gazing on the darkling main; and much he be sought his dear mother,
stretching forth his hands:

   [Footnote 41: Hesych. ρίγιον, φοβερώτερον, χαλεπώτερον.]

   [Footnote 42: "Misit eos, minaci jusso dato."--Heyne.]

   [Footnote 43: So called from their inviolability,--άσνλον γαρ και
   θείον το γένος των κηρύκων.--Schol. Και εζήν αντοίς πανταχόσε
   άδεώς ίεναι.--Pollux, viii. They were properly sacred to Mercury
   (id. iv. 9. Cf. Feith, Antiq. Homer, iv. 1), but are called the
   messengers of Jove, as being under his special protection, with a
   reference to the supporting of regal authority.]

   [Footnote 44: Observe the aposiopesis.]

   [Footnote 45: Not for the loss of Briseïs, but on account of the
   affront.]

"O mother, since thou hast borne me, to be but short-lived, at least
then ought high-thundering Olympian Jove to have vouchsafed honour to
me; but now he has not honoured me ever so little; for the son of
Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, has dishonoured me; for he, taking away
my prize, possesses it, himself having wrested it [from me]."

Thus he spoke, weeping. But to him his venerable mother hearkened,
sitting in the depths of the ocean beside her aged sire. And immediately
she rose up from the hoary deep, like a mist. And then she sat before
him weeping, and soothed him with her hand, and addressed him, and spoke
aloud:

"Son, why weepest thou--on account of what has grief come upon thy mind?
Declare it, nor hide it in thy soul, that we both may know it."

But her, sighing deeply, swift-footed Achilles addressed: "Thou knowest;
why should I tell all these things to thee, already knowing [them]? We
went against Thebe,[46] the sacred city of Eëtion; and this we
plundered, and brought hither all [the spoil]. And these things indeed
the sons of the Greeks fairly divided among themselves, and selected for
Agamemnon the fair-cheeked daughter of Chryses. But Chryses, priest of
the far-darting Apollo, came afterwards to the fleet ships of the
brazen-mailed Greeks, about to ransom his daughter, and bringing
invaluable ransoms, having in his hand the fillets of far-darting
Apollo, on his golden sceptre. And he supplicated all the Greeks, but
chiefly the two sons of Atreus, the leaders of the people. Upon this all
the other Greeks shouted assent, that the priest should be reverenced,
and the splendid ransoms accepted: yet it was not pleasing to Agamemnon,
son of Atreus, in his mind; but he dismissed him evilly, and added a
harsh mandate. The old man therefore went back enraged; but Apollo
hearkened to him praying, for he was very dear to him. And he sent a
destructive arrow against the Greeks; and the forces were now dying one
upon another, and the shafts of the god went on all sides through the
wide army of the Greeks. But to us the skilful seer unfolded the divine
will of the Far-darter. Straightway I first exhorted that we should
appease the god; but then rage seized upon the son of Atreus, and
instantly rising, he uttered a threatening speech, which is now
accomplished; for the rolling-eyed Greeks attend her to Chrysa with a
swift bark, and bring presents to the king; but the heralds have just
now gone from my tent, conducting the virgin daughter of Brisëis, whom
the sons of the Greeks gave to me. But do thou, if thou art able, aid
thy son. Going to Olympus, supplicate Jove, if ever thou didst delight
the heart of Jove as to anything, by word or deed; for I frequently
heard thee boasting in the palaces of my sire, when thou saidest that
thou alone, amongst the immortals, didst avert unworthy destruction from
the cloud-collecting son of Saturn, when the other Olympian inhabitants,
Juno, and Neptune, and Pallas Minerva, wished to bind him. But thou, O
goddess, having approached, freed him from his chains, having quickly
summoned to lofty Olympus, the hundred-handed, whom the gods call
Briareus, and all men Ægeon, because he was superior to his father in
strength,[47] who then sat by the son of Saturn, exulting in renown. Him
then the blessed gods dreaded, nor did they bind [Jove]. Of these things
now reminding him, sit beside him, and embrace his knees, if in anywise
he may consent to aid the Trojans, and hem in[48] at their ships, and
along the sea, the Greeks [while they get] slaughtered, that all may
enjoy their king, and that the son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, may
know his baleful folly,[49] when he in no wise honoured the bravest of
the Greeks."

   [Footnote 46: Thebe was situated on the border of Mysia, on the
   mountain Placus, in the district afterwards called Adramyttium.
   The inhabitants were Cilicians.--See Heyne, and De Pinedo on
   Steph. Byz. s.v. p. 307, n. 58.]

   [Footnote 47: There is some doubt whether Homer considered
   Briareus as the son of Neptune or of Uranus and Terra.--See
   Arnold. The fable is ridiculed by Minucius Felix, § 22.]

   [Footnote 48: See Buttm. Lexil. pp. 257, 261, Fishlake's
   translation.]

   [Footnote 49: The idea of infatuation is not, however,
   necessarily implied in ἄτη. See Buttm. Lex. p. 5, sq.]

But him Thetis then answered, shedding down a tear: "Alas! my son,
wherefore have I reared thee, having brought thee forth in an evil hour.
Would that thou wert seated at the ships tearless and uninjured; for thy
destined life is but for a very short period, nor very long; but now art
thou both swift-fated and wretched above all mortals: therefore have I
brought thee forth in my palace under an evil fate. However, to tell thy
words to thunder-delighting Jove, I myself will go to snow-clad Olympus,
if by chance he will be persuaded. But do thou, now sitting at the
swift ships, wage resentment against the Greeks, and totally abstain
from war. For yesterday Jove went to Oceanus,[50] to the blameless
Æthiopians, to a banquet, and with him went all the gods. But on the
twelfth day he will return to Olympus; and then will I go to the
brazen-floored palace of Jove, and suppliantly embrace his knees, and I
think that he will be persuaded."

   [Footnote 50: According to Homer, the earth is a circular plane,
   and Oceanus is an immense stream encircling it, from which the
   different rivers run inward.]

Thus having said, she departed, and left him there wrathful in his soul
for his well-girded maid, whom they had taken from him against his will.
But Ulysses, meantime, came to Chrysa, bringing the sacred hecatomb. But
they, when they had entered the deep haven, first furled their sails,
and stowed them in the sable bark; they next brought the mast to its
receptacle, lowering it quickly by its stays, and they rowed the vessel
forwards with oars into its moorage; they heaved out the sleepers, and
tied the hawsers. They themselves then went forth on the breakers of the
sea, and disembarked the hecatomb to far-darting Apollo, and then they
made the daughter of Chryses descend from the sea-traversing bark. Then
wise Ulysses, leading her to the altar, placed her in the hands of her
dear father, and addressed him:

"O Chryses, Agamemnon, king of men, sent me forth to conduct to thee thy
daughter, and to sacrifice a sacred hecatomb to Phœbus for the Greeks,
that we may appease the king, who now has sent evils fraught with
groanings upon the Argives."

Thus having spoken, he placed her in his hands; but he rejoicing
received his beloved daughter. Then they immediately placed in order the
splendid hecatomb for the god around the well-built altar. After that
they washed their hands, and held up the pounded barley.[51] But for
them, Chryses, uplifting his hands, prayed with loud voice:

   [Footnote 51: "Salted barley meal,"--Anthon; "whole
   barley,"--Voss; but Buttmann, Lexil. p. 454, in a highly amusing
   note, observes, "no supposition of a regular and constant
   distinction between the Greeks and Romans, the one using barley
   whole and the other coarsely ground, possible as the thing may
   be in itself, is to be entertained without the express testimony
   of the ancients."]

"Hear me, O thou of the silver bow, who art wont to protect Chrysa and
divine Cilla, and who mightily rulest over Tenedos! already indeed at a
former time didst thou hear me praying, and didst honour me, and didst
very much afflict the people of the Greeks, now also accomplish for me
this further request: even now avert from the Greeks this unseemly
pestilence."

Thus he spoke praying, and him Phœbus Apollo heard. But after they had
prayed, and sprinkled the pounded barley, they first bent back [the neck
of the victims], killed them, and flayed them, and cut out the thighs,
and wrapped them round with the fat, having arranged it in double folds;
then laid the raw flesh upon them. Then the old man burned them on
billets, and poured sparkling wine upon them; and near him the youths
held five-pronged spits in their hands. But after the thighs were
roasted, and they had tasted the entrails, they then cut the rest of
them into small pieces, and fixed them on spits, and roasted them
skilfully, and drew all the viands [off the spits].

But when they had ceased from their labour, and had prepared the
banquet, they feasted; nor did their soul in anywise lack a due
allowance of the feast: but when they had dismissed the desire of drink
and food, the youths on the one hand filled the goblets with wine to the
brim,[52] and handed round the wine to all, having poured the first of
the wine into the cups.[53] But the Grecian youths throughout the day
were appeasing the god by song, chanting the joyous Pæan,[54] hymning
the Far-darter, and he was delighted in his mind as he listened. But
when the sun had set, and darkness came on, then they slept near the
hawsers of their ships. But when the mother of dawn,[55] rosy-fingered
morning, appeared, straightway then they set sail for the spacious camp
of the Achæans, and to them far-darting Apollo sent a favourable gale.
But they erected the mast and expanded the white sails. The wind
streamed[56] into the bosom of the sail; and as the vessel briskly ran,
the dark wave roared loudly around the keel; but she scudded through the
wave, holding on her way. But when they reached the wide armament of the
Greeks, they drew up the black ship on the continent, far upon the sand,
and stretched long props under it; but they dispersed themselves through
their tents and ships.

   [Footnote 52: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 291, sqq. The custom of
   crowning the goblets with flowers was of later origin.]

   [Footnote 53: See Battm. p. 168. The customary libation is
   meant.]

   [Footnote 54: On the Pæan, see Müller, Gk. Lit. iii. § 4. and
   Dorians, vol. i. p. 370.]

   [Footnote 55: See Loewe on Odyss. ii. 1, and my translation.
   Kennedy renders it "ushering in the dawn."]

   [Footnote 56: See Buttm. p. 484. I am partly indebted to Anthon
   in rendering this expression.]

But the Jove-sprung son of Peleus, swift-footed Achilles, continued his
wrath, sitting at his swift ships, nor ever did he frequent the assembly
of noble heroes, nor the fight, but he pined away his dear heart,
remaining there, although he longed for the din and the battle.

Now when the twelfth morning from that time arose,[57] then indeed all
the gods who are for ever went together to Olympus, but Jupiter
preceded. But Thetis was not forgetful of the charges of her son, but
she emerged from the wave of the sea, and at dawn ascended lofty heaven
and Olympus;[58] and she found the far-seeing son of Saturn sitting
apart from the others, on the highest summit of many-peaked Olympus, and
then she sat down before him, and embraced his knees with her left hand,
but with the right taking him by the chin, imploring, she thus addressed
king Jove, the son of Saturn:

"O father Jove, if ever I have aided thee among the immortals, either in
word or deed, accomplish for me this desire: honour my son, who is the
most short-lived of others; for now indeed Agamemnon, the king of men,
has disgraced him; for he possesses his prize, he himself having borne
it away. Do thou at least, Olympian Jove all counselling, honour him:
and so long grant victory to the Trojans, until the Greeks shall
reverence my son, and shall advance him in honour."

   [Footnote 57: Cf. ver. 425.]

   [Footnote 58: Οὐρανός is here the upper clear region of air,--the
   ether, into which Olympus soared up.--Voss.]

Thus she spoke; but cloud-compelling Jove answered her nothing, but sat
silent for a long time. And as Thetis seized his knees, fast clinging
she held them, and thus again entreated: "Do but now promise to me
explicitly, and grant or refuse, (for in thee there is no dread,) that I
may well know how far I am the most dishonoured goddess amongst all."

But her cloud-compelling Jove, deeply moved, addressed: "Truly now this
[will be] a grievous matter, since thou wilt cause me to give offence to
Juno, when she shall irritate me with reproachful words. For, even
without reason, she is perpetually chiding me amongst the immortal gods,
and also says that I aid the Trojans in battle. But do thou on thy part
now depart, lest Juno behold thee: but these things shall be my care,
until I perform them. But if [thou wilt have it thus], so be it; I will
nod to thee with my head, that thou mayest feel confidence. For this
from me is the greatest pledge among the immortals: for my pledge, even
whatsoever I shall sanction by nod, is not to be retracted, neither
fallacious nor unfulfilled."

The son of Saturn spoke, and nodded thereupon with his dark eyebrows.
And then the ambrosial locks of the king were shaken over him from his
immortal head; and he made mighty Olympus tremble. Thus having
conferred, they separated. She at once plunged from splendid Olympus
into the profound sea. But Jove on the other hand [returned] to his
palace. But all the gods rose up together from their seats to meet their
sire; nor did any dare to await[59] him approaching, but all rose in his
presence. Thus indeed he sat there on his throne; nor was Juno
unconscious, having seen that silver-footed Thetis, the daughter of the
marine old man, had joined in deliberation with him. Forthwith with
reproaches she accosted Saturnian Jove:

"Which of the gods again, O deceitful one, has been concerting measures
with thee? Ever is it agreeable to thee, being apart from me, plotting
secret things, to decide thereon; nor hast thou ever yet deigned
willingly to tell me one word of what thou dost meditate."

   [Footnote 59: Heyne supplies "sedendo."]

To her then replied the father of men and gods: "O Juno, build up no
hopes of knowing all my counsels; difficult would they be for thee,
although thou art my consort. But whatever it may be fit for thee to
hear, none then either of gods or men shall know it before thee: but
whatever I wish to consider apart from the gods, do thou neither inquire
into any of these things, nor investigate them."

But him the large-eyed, venerable Juno then answered: "Most dread son
of Saturn, what a word hast thou spoken? Heretofore have I ever
questioned thee much, nor pryed [into thy secrets]; but thou mayest very
quietly deliberate on those things which thou desirest. But at present I
greatly fear in my soul, lest silver-footed Thetis, the daughter of the
marine old man, may have influenced thee: for at dawn she sat by thee
and embraced thy knees: to her I suspect thou didst plainly promise that
thou wouldest honour Achilles, and destroy many at the ships of the
Greeks."

But her answering, cloud-compelling Jove addressed: "Perverse one! thou
art always suspecting, nor do I escape thee. Nevertheless thou shalt
produce no effect at all, but thou shalt be farther from my heart: and
this will be more bitter to thee. But granted this be so, it appears to
be my pleasure.[60] But sit down in peace, and obey my mandate, lest as
many deities as are in Olympus avail thee not against me, I drawing
near,[61] when I shall lay my resistless hands upon thee."

   [Footnote 60: _I.e._, say that what you suspect is correct; well
   then, such is my will.]

   [Footnote 61: I prefer taking ίονθ' for ίοντα, not for ίοντε, as
   Buttmann wished.--See Anthon.]

Thus he spoke: but venerable, large-eyed Juno feared, and sat down
silent, having bent her heart to submission. But the heavenly gods
murmured throughout the palace of Jove. And the renowned artificer,
Vulcan, began to harangue them, doing kind offices to his beloved
mother, white-armed Juno:

"Truly now these will be grievous matters, and no longer tolerable, if
ye twain contend thus on account of mortals, and excite uproar among the
deities. Nor will there be any enjoyment in the delightful banquet,
since the worse things prevail.[62] But to my mother I advise, she
herself being intelligent, to gratify my dear father Jove, lest my sire
may again reprove her, and disturb our banquet. For if the Olympian
Thunderer wishes to hurl [us] from our seats[63]--for he is much the
most powerful. But do thou soothe him with gentle words; then will the
Olympian king straightway be propitious to us."

   [Footnote 62: Cf. Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 9. The saying is almost
   proverbial.]

   [Footnote 63: An aposiopesis; understand, "he can easily do so."]

Thus then he spoke, and rising, he placed the double cup[64] in the hand
of his dear mother, and addressed her:

"Be patient, my mother, and restrain thyself, although grieved, lest
with my own eyes I behold thee beaten, being very dear to me; nor then
indeed should I be able, though full of grief, to assist thee; for
Olympian Jove is difficult to be opposed. For heretofore, having seized
me by the foot, he cast me, desiring at one time to assist you, down
from the heavenly threshold. All day was I carried down through the air,
and I fell on Lemnos[65] with the setting sun: and but little life was
in me by that time. There the Sintian[66] men forthwith received and
tended[67] me, having fallen."

Thus he spoke: but the white-armed goddess Juno smiled; and smiling she
received the cup from the hand of her son. But he, beginning from left
to right,[68] kept pouring out for all the other gods, drawing nectar
from the goblet. And then inextinguishable laughter arose among the
immortal gods, when they saw Vulcan bustling about[69] through the
mansion.

   [Footnote 64: See my note on Od. iii. p. 30, n. 13, ed. Bohn. It
   was "a double cup with a common bottom in the middle."--Crusius.]

   [Footnote 65: Hercules having sacked Troy, was, on his return,
   driven to Cos by a storm raised by Juno, who was hostile to him,
   and who had contrived to cast Jupiter into a sleep, that he might
   not interrupt her purpose. Jupiter awaking, in resentment of the
   artifice practised upon him, bound her feet to iron anvils, which
   Vulcan attempting to loose, was cast headlong down to Lemnos by
   his enraged sire.]

   [Footnote 66: A race of robbers, of Tyrrhenian origin (according
   to Müller), and the ancient inhabitants of Lemnos. This island
   was ever after sacred to Vulcan. Cf. Lactant. i. 15; Milton, P.L.
   i. 740, sqq.]

   [Footnote 67: See Arnold.]

   [Footnote 68: This meaning of ένδέξια is due to Buttmann.]

   [Footnote 69: See Buttmann, Lexil. p. 481.]

Thus, then, they feasted[70] the entire day till the setting sun; nor
did the soul want anything of the equal feast, nor of the beautiful
harp, which Apollo held, nor of the Muses, who accompanied him,
responding in turn, with delicious voice.

   [Footnote 70: "The gods formed a sort of political community of
   their own, which had its hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and
   duties, its contentions for power and occasional revolutions, its
   public meetings in the agora of Olympus, and its multitudinous
   banquets or festivals."--Grote, vol. i. p. 463. Cf. Müller, Gk.
   Lit. ii. § 2.]

But when the splendid light of the sun was sunk, they retired to repose,
each one to his home, where renowned Vulcan, lame of both legs, with
cunning skill had built a house for each. But the Olympian thunderer
Jove went to his couch, where he lay before, when sweet sleep came upon
him. There, having ascended, he lay down to rest, and beside him
golden-throned Juno.




                           BOOK THE SECOND.


                              ARGUMENT.

Jove sends a dream to Agamemnon, in consequence of which he re-assembles
the army. Thersites is punished for his insolent speech, and the troops
are restrained from seeking a return homewards. The catalogue of the
ships and the forces of the confederates follows.


The rest, then, both gods and horse-arraying men,[71] slept all the
night: but Jove sweet sleep possessed not; but he was pondering in his
mind how he might honour Achilles, and destroy many at the ships of the
Greeks. But this device appeared best to him in his mind, to send a
fatal dream[72] to Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. And addressing him, he
spoke winged words:

"Haste away, pernicious dream, to the swift ships of the Greeks. Going
into the tent of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, utter very accurately
everything as I shall command thee. Bid him arm the long-haired
Achæans[73] with all their array; for now perhaps he may[74] take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans; for the immortals who possess the
Olympian mansions no longer think dividedly, for Juno, supplicating,
hath bent all [to her will]. And woes are impending over the Trojans."

Thus he spake: and the dream[75] accordingly departed, as soon as it
heard the mandate. And quickly it came to the swift ships of the Greeks,
and went unto Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. But him it found sleeping in
his tent, and ambrosial slumber was diffused around. And he stood over
his head, like unto Nestor, the son of Neleus, him, to wit, whom
Agamemnon honoured most of the old men. To him assimilating himself, the
divine dream addressed him:

   [Footnote 71: See Anthon, who observes that "fighting from on
   horseback was not practised in the Homeric times."]

   [Footnote 72: Some would personify Oneirus, as god of dreams.]

   [Footnote 73: Observe the distinction, for the Abantes, ver. 542,
   and the Thracians, iv. 533, wore their hair differently.]

   [Footnote 74: κεν limits the assertion to _probability_, so that
   Jupiter does not utter a _direct_ falsehood.]

   [Footnote 75: In defence of this cheating conduct of Jove, at
   which Plato was much scandalized, Coleridge, p. 154, observes:
   "The οὖλος ὄνειρος was a lying spirit, which the father of gods
   and men had a supreme right to commission for the purpose of
   working out his ultimate will."]

"Sleepest thou, son of the warrior, horse-taming Atreus? It becomes not
a counsel-giving man, to whom the people have been intrusted, and to
whom so many things are a care, to sleep all the night. But now quickly
attend to me; for I am a messenger to thee from Jove, who, although far
distant, greatly regards and pities thee. He orders thee to arm the
long-haired Greeks with all their array, for now mayest thou take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans, since the immortals, who possess the
Olympian mansions, no longer think dividedly; for Juno, supplicating,
hath bent all [to her will], and woes from Jove are impending over the
Trojans. But do thou preserve this in thy recollection, nor let
forgetfulness possess thee, when sweet sleep shall desert thee."

Thus then having spoken, he departed, and left him there pondering these
things in his mind, which were not destined to be accomplished. For he,
foolish, thought that he would take the city of Priam on that day; nor
knew he the deeds which Jupiter was really devising; for even he was
about yet to impose additional hardships and sorrows upon both Trojans
and Greeks, through mighty conflicts. But he awoke from his sleep, and
the heavenly voice was diffused around him. He sat up erect, and put on
his soft tunic, beautiful, new; and around him he threw his large cloak.
And he bound his beautiful sandals on his shining feet, and slung from
his shoulders the silver-studded sword. He also took his paternal
sceptre, ever imperishable, with which he went to the ships of the
brazen-mailed Greeks.

The goddess Aurora now[76] ascended wide Olympus, announcing the dawn to
Jove and the other immortals. But he[77] on his part ordered the
clear-voiced heralds to summon the long-haired Achæans[78] to an
assembly. They therefore summoned them, and the people were very
speedily assembled. First the assembly of magnanimous elders sat at the
ship of Nestor, the Pylus-born king. Having called them together, he
propounded a prudent counsel:

   [Footnote 76: ῥα appears to mark the regular transition from one
   event to another.]

   [Footnote 77: Agamemnon.]

   [Footnote 78: See on ver. 11.]

"Hear me, my friends: a divine dream came to me in sleep, during the
ambrosial night, very like unto the noble Nestor, in form, in stature,
and in mien. And it stood above my head, and addressed me: 'Sleepest
thou, son of the warrior, horse-taming Atreus? It becomes not a
counsellor, to whom the people have been intrusted, and to whom so many
things are a care, to sleep all the night. But now quickly attend to me;
for I am a messenger to thee from Jove, who, although far distant,
greatly regards and pities thee. He orders thee to arm the long-haired
Greeks with all their array, for now mayest thou take the wide-wayed
city of the Trojans; for the immortals, who possess the Olympian
mansions, no longer think dividedly, for Juno, supplicating, has bent
all [to her will], and woes from Jove are impending over the Trojans;
but do thou preserve this in thy thoughts.' Thus having spoken, flying
away, it departed; but sweet sleep resigned me. But come, [let us try]
if by any means we can arm the sons of the Greeks. But first with words
will I sound their inclinations, as is right, and I will command them to
fly with their many-benched ships; but do you restrain them with words,
one in one place, another in another."

He indeed having thus spoken, sat down; but Nestor, who was king of
sandy Pylus, rose up, who wisely counselling, harangued them, and said:

"O friends, generals and counsellors of the Argives, if any other of the
Greeks had told this dream, we should have pronounced it a fabrication,
and withdrawn ourselves [from the reciter]. But now he has seen it, who
boasts himself [to be] by far the greatest man in the army. But come on,
if by any means we can arm the sons of the Greeks."

Thus then having spoken, he began to depart from the assembly; and they,
the sceptre-bearing princes, arose, and obeyed the shepherd of the
tribes, and the hosts rushed forward. Even as the swarms of clustering
bees,[79] issuing ever anew from the hollow rock, go forth, and fly in
troops over the vernal[80] flowers, and some have flitted in bodies
here, and some there; thus of these [Greeks] many nations from the ships
and tents kept marching in troops in front of the steep shore to the
assembly. And in the midst of them blazed Rumour, messenger of Jove,
urging them to proceed; and they kept collecting together. The assembly
was tumultuous, and the earth groaned beneath, as the people seated
themselves, and there was a clamour; but nine heralds vociferating
restrained them, if by any means they would cease from clamour, and
hear the Jove-nurtured princes. With difficulty at length the people sat
down, and were kept to their respective[81] seats, having desisted from
their clamour, when king Agamemnon arose, holding the sceptre, which
Vulcan had laboriously wrought. Vulcan in the first place gave it to
king Jove, the son of Saturn, and Jove in turn gave it to his messenger,
the slayer of Argus.[82] But king Mercury gave it to steed-taming
Pelops, and Pelops again gave it to Atreus, shepherd of the people. But
Atreus, dying, left it to Thyestes, rich in flocks; but Thyestes again
left it to Agamemnon to be borne, that he might rule over many
islands,[83] and all Argos.[84] Leaning upon this, he spoke words
amongst the Greeks:

   [Footnote 79: The dative here implies direction, ἐπὶ increasing
   its force, according to Stadelmann and Kühner, who are followed
   by Anthon. I have restored the old interpretation, which is much
   less far-fetched, and is placed beyond doubt by Virgil's
   imitations.--"_per_ florea rura," Æn. i. 430; "floribus insidunt
   variis." Æn. vi. 708. "Among fresh dews and flowers, Fly to and
   fro."--Milton. P.L. i. 771.]

   [Footnote 80: _I. e._ over the flowers in the spring-time, when
   bees first appear. See Virg. l. c. Eurip. Hipp. 77, μέλισσα
   λειμῶν' ᾐρινὸν ὂιέρχεται.--Nicias, Anthol. i. 31, ἔαρ φαίνουσα
   μέλισσα.--Longus, i. 4.]

   [Footnote 81: Observe the distributive use of κατά. Cf. Od. iii.
   7.]

   [Footnote 82: Mercury. Cf. Ovid. Met. i. 624. sqq.]

   [Footnote 83: On the extended power of Agamemnon, see Thucyd. i.
   9.]

   [Footnote 84: On this sceptre, the type of the wealth and
   influence of the house of the Atrides, see Grote. vol. i. p.
   212.]

"O friends, Grecian heroes, servants of Mars, Jove, the son of Saturn,
has entangled me in a heavy misfortune. Cruel, who before indeed
promised to me, and vouchsafed by his nod, that I should return home,
having destroyed well-fortified Ilium. But now he has devised an evil
deception, and commands me to return to Argos, inglorious, after I have
lost many of my people. So forsooth it appears to be agreeable to
all-powerful Jove, who has already overthrown the citadels of many
cities, yea, and will even yet overthrow them, for transcendent is his
power. For this were disgraceful even for posterity to hear, that so
brave and so numerous a people of the Greeks warred an ineffectual war,
and fought with fewer men; but as yet no end has appeared. For if we,
Greeks and Trojans, having struck a faithful league,[85] wished that
both should be numbered, and [wished] to select the Trojans, on the one
hand, as many as are townsmen; and if we Greeks, on the other hand, were
to be divided into decades, and to choose a single man of the Trojans to
pour out wine [for each decade], many decades would be without a
cupbearer.[86] So much more numerous, I say, the sons of the Greeks are
than the Trojans who dwell in the city. But there are spear-wielding
auxiliaries from many cities, who greatly stand in my way, and do not
permit me wishing to destroy the well-inhabited city. Already have nine
years of mighty Jove passed away, and now the timbers of our ships have
rotted, and the ropes have become untwisted.[87] Our wives and infant
children sit in our dwellings expecting us; but to us the work for which
we came hither remains unaccomplished, contrary to expectation. But
come, as I shall recommend, let us all obey; let us fly with the ships
to our dear native land, for at no future time shall we take wide-wayed
Troy."

   [Footnote 85: Ὂρκια is probably used as an adjective,
   understanding ὶερεῖα, the victims that were slain in order to
   ratify the oath. See however Buttm. Lexil. p. 439.]

   [Footnote 86: The Greeks doubled the Trojans in number. See
   Anthon.]

   [Footnote 87: Observe the change of construction in λέλυνται with
   the neuter plural. Apollon. de Syntaxi, iii. 11. Τὰ σπάρτα
   λέλυνται καταλληλότερον τοῦ δοῦρα σέσηπε.]

Thus he spoke; and to them he aroused the heart in their breasts, to all
throughout the multitude, whoever had not heard his scheme.[88] And the
assembly was moved, as the great waves of the Icarian Sea, which,
indeed, both the south-east wind and the south are wont to raise,[89]
rushing from the clouds of father Jove. And as when the west wind[90]
agitates the thick-standing corn, rushing down upon it impetuous, and it
[the crop] bends with its ears; so was all the assembly agitated. Some
with shouting rushed to the ships, but from beneath their feet the dust
stood suspended aloft; and some exhorted one another to seize the
vessels, and drag them to the great ocean; and they began to clear the
channels. The shout of them, eager [to return] home, rose to the sky,
and they withdrew the stays from beneath the vessels. Then truly a
return had happened to the Argives, contrary to destiny, had not Juno
addressed herself to Minerva:

   [Footnote 88: _I. e._ his real object. Cf. vs. 75, sqq.]

   [Footnote 89: Spitzner and the later editors unite in reading
   κινήση for κινήσει from the Venice MS. See Arnold.]

   [Footnote 90:

                     ----"As thick as when a field
            Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
            Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
            Sways them."--Paradise Lost, iv. 980.]

"Alas! indomitable daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, thus now shall the
Argives fly home to their dear native land, over the broad back of the
deep, and leave to Priam glory, and to the Trojans Argive Helen, on
whose account many Greeks have perished at Troy, far from their dear
native land? But go now to the people of the brazen-mailed Greeks, and
restrain each man with thy own flattering words, nor suffer them to
launch to the sea their evenly-plied[91] barks." Thus she spoke, nor did
the azure-eyed goddess Minerva refuse compliance. But she, hastening,
descended down from the summits of Olympus, and quickly reached the
swift ships of the Achæans. Then she found Ulysses, of equal weight with
Jove in counsel, standing still; nor was he touching his well-benched,
sable bark, since regret affected him in heart and mind. But standing
near him, azure-eyed Minerva said:

   [Footnote 91: _I.e._ rowed on both sides. But Rost and Liddell
   (s.v.) prefer "swaying, rocking on both sides."]

"Jove-sprung son of Laertes, Ulysses of many wiles, thus then will ye
fly home to your dear native land, embarking in your many-benched ships?
And will ye then leave to Priam glory, and to the Trojans Argive Helen,
on whose account many Greeks have fallen at Troy, far from their dear
native land? But go now to the people of the Greeks, delay not; and
restrain each man by thy own flattering words, nor suffer them to launch
to the sea their evenly-plied barks."

Thus she spoke, but he knew the voice of the goddess speaking. Then he
hastened to run, and cast away his cloak, but the herald Eurybates, the
Ithacensian, who followed him, took it up. But he, meeting Agamemnon,
son of Atreus, received from him[92] the ever-imperishable paternal
sceptre, with which he went through the ships of the brazen-mailed
Greeks.

   [Footnote 92: This is an instance of the σχῆμα Σικελικόν, as in
   H. O. 88, γίνεται δε παραλαμξανομένης δοτικῆς πτώσεως άντι
   γενικῆς και κατὰ παράλειψιν τού παρἁ προθέσεως.--Lesbonax, περί
   σχημ. ρ. 181, ed. Valck.]

Whatsoever king, indeed, or distinguished man he chanced to find
standing beside him, he checked him with gentle words:

"Strange man! it ill becomes thee, coward-like, to be in trepidation;
but both sit down thyself, and make the other people sit down, for thou
hast not as yet clearly ascertained what the intention of Atrides is. He
is now making trial of, and will quickly punish the sons of the Greeks.
We have not all heard what he said in council. Take care lest he, being
incensed, do some mischief to the sons of the Greeks. For the anger of a
Jove-nurtured king is great; his honour too is from Jove, and
great-counselling Jove loves him."

But on the other hand, whatever man of the common people he chanced to
see, or find shouting out, him would he strike with the sceptre, and
reprove with words:

"Fellow, sit quietly, and listen to the voice of others, who are better
than thou; for thou art unwarlike and weak, nor ever of any account
either in war or in council. We Greeks cannot all by any means govern
here, for a government of many is not a good thing;[93] let there be but
one chief, one king,[94] to whom the son of wily Saturn has given a
sceptre, and laws, that he may govern among them."

   [Footnote 93: See Aristot. Polit. iv. 4, and Cicer. de Off. i. 8.
   This true maxim has been often abused by tyrants, as by Dion
   (Corn. Nepos, Dion, § 6, 4), Caligula (Sueton. Cal. 22), and
   Domitian (id. 12).]

   [Footnote 94: On the aristocratic character of Homer's poetry,
   see Müller, Gk Lit. iv. § 2.]

Thus he, acting as chief, was arranging the army. But they again rushed
with tumult from the ships and tents to an assembly, as when the waves
of the much-resounding sea roar against the lofty beach, and the deep
resounds.

The others indeed sat down, and were kept to their respective seats. But
Thersites alone, immediate in words, was wrangling; who, to wit, knew in
his mind expressions both unseemly and numerous, so as idly, and not
according to discipline, to wrangle with the princes, but [to blurt out]
whatever seemed to him to be matter of laughter to the Greeks. And he
was the ugliest man who came to Ilium. He was bandy-legged,[95] and lame
of one foot; his shoulders were crooked, and contracted towards his
breast; and his head was peaked[96] towards the top, and thin woolly
hair was scattered over it. To Achilles and Ulysses he was particularly
hostile, for these two he used to revile. But on this occasion, shouting
out shrilly, he uttered bitter taunts against noble Agamemnon; but the
Greeks were greatly irritated against him, and were indignant in their
minds. But vociferating aloud, he reviled Agamemnon with words:

   [Footnote 95: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 540, § 8.]

   [Footnote 96: See Buttm. p. 537, who derives φοζος from φώγειν,
   _to dry_, as if φωξός, _warped by heat_.]

"Son of Atreus, of what dost thou now complain, or what dost thou want?
Thy tents are full of brass, and many chosen women are in thy tents,
whom we Greeks bestow on thee the first of all, whenever we capture a
city. Dost thou still require gold, which some one of the horse-taming
Trojans shall bring from Troy, as a ransom for his son, whom I, or some
other of the Greeks, having bound, may lead away? Or a young maid, that
thou mayest be mingled in dalliance, and whom thou for thyself mayest
retain apart[97] [from the rest]? Indeed it becomes not a man who is
chief in command, to lead the sons of the Greeks into evil. O ye soft
ones, vile disgraces, Grecian dames, no longer Grecian men,[98] let us
return home, home![99] with our ships, and let us leave him here to
digest his honours at Troy, that he may know whether we really aid him
in anything or not. He, who but just now has dishonoured Achilles, a man
much more valiant than himself; for, taking away, he retains his prize,
he himself having seized it. But assuredly there is not much anger in
the heart of Achilles; but he is forbearing; for truly, were it not so,
O son of Atreus, thou wouldest have insulted now for the last time."

   [Footnote 97: Not being compelled to restore her, like the
   daughter of Chryses.]

   [Footnote 98: Virg. Æn. ix. 617: "O vere Phrygiæ, neque enim
   Phryges!"]

   [Footnote 99: This is Nägelsbach's spirited rendering of οίκαδε
   περ.]

Thus spoke Thersites, reviling Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people.
But godlike Ulysses immediately stood beside him, and eyeing him with
scowling brow, reproached him with harsh language:

"Thersites, reckless babbler! noisy declaimer though thou be, refrain,
nor be forward singly to strive with princes; for I affirm that there is
not another mortal more base than thou, as many as came with the son of
Atreus to Ilium. Wherefore do not harangue, having kings in thy mouth,
nor cast reproaches against them, nor be on the watch for a return. Not
as yet indeed do we certainly know how these matters will turn out,
whether we sons of the Greeks shall return to our advantage or
disadvantage. Wherefore, now thou sittest reviling Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, the leader of the people, because the Grecian heroes give him
very many gifts, whilst thou, insulting, dost harangue. But I declare to
thee, which shall also be accomplished: if ever again I catch thee
raving, as now thou art, no longer may the head of Ulysses rest upon his
shoulders, and no longer may I be called the father of Telemachus,
unless I seizing thee divest thee of thy very garments, thy coat, thy
cloak, and those which cover thy loins; and send thyself weeping to the
swift ships, having beaten thee out of the assembly with severe blows."

Thus he spoke, and smote him with the sceptre upon the back and the
shoulders; but he writhed, and plenteous tears fell from him, and a
bloody weal arose under the sceptre upon his back. But he sat down and
trembled; and grieving, looking foolish, he wiped away the tears. They,
although chagrined, laughed heartily at him, and thus one would say,
looking towards the person next him:

"O strange! surely ten thousand good deeds has Ulysses already
performed, both originating good counsels, and arousing the war. But now
has he done this by far the best deed amongst the Greeks, in that he has
restrained this foul-mouthed reviler from his harangues. Surely his
petulant mind will not again urge him to chide the kings with scurrilous
language."

Thus spake the multitude; but Ulysses, the sacker of cities, arose,
holding the sceptre, and beside him azure-eyed Minerva, likened unto a
herald, ordered the people to be silent, that at the same time the sons
of the Greeks, both first and last, might hear his speech, and weigh his
counsel. He wisely counselling, addressed them, and said:

"O son of Atreus, the Greeks wish to render thee now, O king, the
meanest amongst articulately-speaking men; nor perform their promise to
thee,[100] which they held forth, coming hither from steed-nourishing
Argos, that thou shouldest return home, having destroyed well-fortified
Ilium. For, like tender boys, or widowed women, they bewail unto one
another to return home. And truly it is a hardship to return [so],
having been grieved. For he is impatient who is absent even for a single
month from his wife, remaining with his many-benched ship,[101] though
wintry storms and the boisterous sea may be hemming in;[102] but to us
it is [now] the ninth revolving year since we have been lingering here.
Wherefore I am not indignant that the Greeks are growing impatient by
their curved ships; but still it would be disgraceful both to remain
here so long, and to return ineffectually. Endure, my friends, and
remain yet awhile, that we may know whether Calchas prophesies truly or
not. For this we well know, and ye are all witnesses, whom the Fates of
death carried not off yesterday and the day before, when the ships of
the Greeks were collected at Aulis, bearing evils to Priam and the
Trojans, and we round about the fountain, at the sacred altars, offered
perfect hecatombs to the immortals, beneath a beauteous plane-tree,
whence flowed limpid water.[103] There a great prodigy appeared; a
serpent, spotted on the back, horrible, which the Olympian himself had
sent forth into the light, having glided out from beneath the altar,
proceeded forthwith to the plane-tree. And there were the young of a
sparrow, an infant offspring, on a topmost branch, cowering amongst the
foliage, eight in number; but the mother, which had brought forth the
young ones, was the ninth. Thereupon he devoured them, twittering
piteously, while the mother kept fluttering about, lamenting her dear
young; but then, having turned himself about, he seized her by the wing,
screaming around. But after he had devoured the young of the sparrow,
and herself, the god who had displayed him rendered him very portentous,
for the son of wily Saturn changed him into a stone; but we, standing
by, were astonished at what happened. Thus, therefore, the dreadful
portents of the gods approached the hecatombs. Calchas, then,
immediately addressed us, revealing from the gods: 'Why are ye become
silent, ye waving-crested Greeks? For us, indeed, provident Jove has
shown a great sign, late, of late accomplishment, the renown of which
shall never perish. As this [serpent] has devoured the young of the
sparrow, eight in number, and herself, the mother which brought out the
brood, was the ninth, so must we for as many years[104] wage war here,
but in the tenth we shall take the wide-wayed city.' He indeed thus
harangued: and all these things are now in course of accomplishment. But
come, ye well-greaved Greeks, remain all here, until we shall take the
great city of Priam."

   [Footnote 100: See Grote, vol. i. p. 392, n. 2.]

   [Footnote 101: I have followed Wolf, taking σὺν υνὶ πολυζύγῳ in
   connection with μενών. Others most awkwardly make σὺν=παρά.]

   [Footnote 102: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. s. v. εἰλεῖν.]

   [Footnote 103: Pausanias, ix. 20, says that both the spring and
   the remains of the tree were shown in his time. The whole of this
   fable has been translated into verse by Cicero, de Div. ii. 30.
   Compare the following passage of Apuleius de Deo Socr. p. 52, ed.
   Elm. "Calchas longe præstabilis ariolari, simul alites et arborem
   contemplatus est, actutum sua divinitate et tempestates flexit,
   et classem deduxit, et decennium prædixit."]

   [Footnote 104: _I. e._ for nine. It is remarkable that so little
   notice has been taken of this story by the later poets. But the
   sacrifice of Iphigenia was a more attractive subject for tragedy
   or episode, and took the place of the Homeric legend.]

Thus he [Ulysses] spoke, and the Greeks loudly shouted, applauding the
speech of divine Ulysses; but all around the ships echoed fearfully, by
reason of the Greeks shouting. Then the Gerenian[105] knight Nestor
addressed them:

"O strange! assuredly now ye are talking like infant children, with whom
warlike achievements are of no account. Whither then will your compacts
and oaths depart? Into the fire now must the counsels and thoughts of
men have sunk, and the unmixed libations, and the right hands in which
we trusted; for in vain do we dispute with words, nor can we discover
any resource, although we have been here for a long time. But do thou, O
son of Atreus, maintaining, as before, thy purpose firm, command the
Greeks in the hard-fought conflicts; and abandon those to perish, one
and both,[106] who, separated from the Greeks, are meditating [but
success shall not attend them] to return back to Argos, before they know
whether the promise of ægis-bearing Jove be false or not. For I say that
the powerful son of Saturn assented on that day, when the Argives
embarked in their swift ships, bearing death and fate to the Trojans,
flashing[107] his lightning on the right, and showing propitious signs.
Let not any one, therefore, hasten to return home before each has slept
with a Trojan wife, and has avenged the cares[108] and griefs of Helen.
But if any one is extravagantly eager to return home, let him lay hands
upon his well-benched black ship, that he may draw on death and fate
before others. But do thou thyself deliberate well, O king, and attend
to another; nor shall the advice which I am about to utter be discarded.
Separate the troops, Agamemnon, according to their tribes and clans,
that kindred may support kindred, and clan. If thou wilt thus act, and
the Greeks obey, thou wilt then ascertain which of the generals and
which of the soldiers is a dastard, and which of them may be brave, for
they will fight their best,[109] and thou wilt likewise learn whether it
is by the divine interposition that thou art destined not to dismantle
the city, or by the cowardice of the troops, and their unskilfulness in
war."

   [Footnote 105: Nestor took this name from a city of Messena
   (_Gerenium_, _a_, or _ia_. See Arnold, and Pinedo on Steph. Byz.
   s.v. Γερηνία), where he was brought up, probably after Pylos had
   been destroyed by Hercules.]

   [Footnote 106: Proverbially meaning a few, but probably referring
   to Achilles and Thersites. See the Scholiast.]

   [Footnote 107: Observe this bold change of construction, and
   compare Valck. on Lesbonax, at the end of his edition of
   Ammonius, p. 188.]

   [Footnote 108: Hesych. ὁρμήματα, μερίμναι. Etym. Μ. ἐνθυμήματα,
   φροντίδες. See Buttm. Lexil. p. 440, sqq. Helen certainly shows
   some repentance in iii. 176.]

   [Footnote 109: "Pro virili parte," Wolf. Cf. i. 271.]

But him answering, king Agamemnon addressed: "Old man, now indeed, as at
other times, dost thou excel the sons of the Greeks in council. For,
would, O father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I were possessed of ten
such fellow-counsellors among the Greeks! So should the city of Priam
quickly fall, captured and destroyed by our hands. But upon me hath
ægis-bearing Jove, the son of Saturn, sent sorrow, who casts me into
unavailing strifes and contentions. For I and Achilles have quarrelled
on account of a maid with opposing words: but I began quarrelling. But
if ever we shall consult in common, no longer then shall there be a
respite from evil to the Trojans, no, not for ever so short a time. Now
go to your repast, that we may join battle. Let each one well sharpen
his spear, and well prepare[110] his shield. Let him give fodder to his
swift-footed steeds, and let each one, looking well to his chariot, get
ready for war; that we may contend all day in the dreadful battle. Nor
shall there be a cessation, not for ever so short a while, until night
coming on shall part the wrath of the heroes. The belt of the
man-protecting[111] shield shall be moist with sweat around the breasts
of each one, and he shall weary his hand round his spear; and each one's
horse shall sweat, dragging the well-polished chariot. But whomsoever I
shall perceive desirous to remain at the beaked ships, apart from the
battle, it will not be possible for him afterwards to escape the dogs
and the birds."

Thus he spoke, but the Argives shouted aloud, as when a wave [roars]
against the steep shore, when the south wind urges it, coming against an
out-jutting rock; for this the billows from all kinds of winds never
forsake, when they may be here or there. And rising up, the people
hastened forth, scattered from ship to ship, and raised up smoke among
the tents, and took repast. And one sacrificed to some one of the
immortal gods, and [another to another,] praying to escape death and the
slaughter of war. But king Agamemnon offered up a fat ox, of five years
old, to the powerful son of Saturn, and summoned the elder chiefs of all
the Greeks, Nestor first of all, and king Idomeneus, but next the two
Ajaxes,[112] and the son of Tydeus, and sixth Ulysses, of equal weight
with Jove in council. But Menelaus, valiant in the din[113] of war, came
of his own accord,[114] for he knew his brother in his heart, how he was
oppressed. Then they stood around the ox, and raised up the pounded
barley cakes: and king Agamemnon, praying amidst them, said:

   [Footnote 110: Schol. εύτρεπισάτω.]

   [Footnote 111: These shields were so large, that they covered
   nearly the whole person.]

   [Footnote 112: One the son of Telamon, the other the son of
   Oïleus.]

   [Footnote 113: This translation is, I think, far bolder than
   "loud-voiced," or "good in the battle-shout." Βοῂ contains the
   whole idea of the tumultuous noise heard in the heat of battle,
   and thence the battle itself. Thus the Schol. ὁ ἐv τῷ πολἐμω
   γενναἲος; and Hesych. κατὰ τῂν μάχην ανδρεἲος.]

   [Footnote 114: Opposed to κλητὸς, as in Oppian, Hal. iii. 360,
   κλητοί τ' αύτό μολοί τε. See Plato Sympos. p. 315, G. Læm. Why
   Menelaus did so, is no matter to us, and probably was no mystery
   to his brother.]

"O Jove, most glorious, most great dark-cloud-collector, dwelling in the
air, may not the sun set, nor darkness come on, before I have laid
prostrate Priam's hall, blazing, and consumed its gates with the hostile
fire; and cut away Hector's coat of mail around his breast, split
asunder with the brass; and around him may many comrades, prone in the
dust, seize the earth with their teeth."

Thus he spoke, nor as yet did the son of Saturn assent, but he accepted
the offering, and increased abundant toil. But after they had prayed,
and thrown forward the bruised barley, they first drew back [the neck of
the victim,] slew it, and flayed it, then cut out the thighs, and
covered them in the fat, having arranged it in a double fold, and then
laid the raw flesh upon them. And they roasted them upon leafless
billets. Next, having pierced the entrails with spits, they held them
over the fire. But then, after the thighs were roasted, and they had
tasted the entrails, they cut the rest of them into small pieces, and
fixed them on spits, and roasted them skilfully, and drew them all off
[the spits]. But when they had ceased from labour, and had prepared the
banquet, they feasted; nor did their soul in anywise lack a due
allowance of the feast. But when they had dismissed the desire of drink
and food, them the Gerenian knight Nestor began to address:

"Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, let us now no
longer sit prating[115] here, nor let us long defer the work which the
deity now delivers into our hands. But come, let the heralds of the
brazen-mailed Greeks, summoning the people, assemble them at the ships,
and let us thus in a body pass through the wide army of the Greeks, that
we may the sooner awaken keen warfare."

   [Footnote 115: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 398, Anthon, and Arnold.]

Thus he spoke, nor did Agamemnon, king of men, refuse compliance.
Immediately he ordered the clear-voiced heralds to summon the
waving-crested Greeks to battle. These then gave the summons, and they
were hastily assembled, and the Jove-nurtured kings, who were with the
son of Atreus, kept hurrying about arranging them. But amongst them was
azure-eyed Minerva, holding the inestimable ægis, which grows not old,
and is immortal: from which one hundred golden fringes were suspended,
all well woven, and each worth a hundred oxen in price. With this she,
looking fiercely about,[116] traversed the host of the Greeks, inciting
them to advance, and kindled strength in the breast of each to fight and
contend unceasingly. Thus war became instantly sweeter to them than to
return in the hollow ships to their dear native land.

As when a destructive[117] fire consumes an immense forest upon the tops
of a mountain, and the gleam is seen from afar: so, as they advanced,
the radiance from the beaming brass glittering on all sides reached
heaven through the air.

   [Footnote 116: See Liddell and Scott.]

   [Footnote 117: Literally "invisible." Hence "making invisible,
   destructive." Cf. Buttm. Lex. s. v. ἀΐδηλος.]

And of these--like as the numerous nations of winged fowl, of geese, or
cranes, or long-necked swans, on the Asian mead, by the waters of
Cayster, fly on this side and on that, disporting with their wings,
alighting beside each other clamorously, and the meadow resounds--so the
numerous nations of these [the Greeks] from the ships and tents poured
themselves forth into the plain of Scamander, countless as the flowers
and leaves are produced in spring.

As the numerous swarms of clustering flies which congregate round the
shepherd's pen in the spring season, when too the milk overflows the
pails; so numerous stood the head-crested Greeks upon the plain against
the Trojans, eager to break [their lines].

And these,[118] as goat-herds easily separate the broad flocks of the
goats, when they are mingled in the pasture, so did the generals here
and there marshal them to go to battle; and among them commander
Agamemnon, resembling, as to his eyes and head, the thunder-delighting
Jove, as to his middle, Mars, and as to his breast, Neptune.

   [Footnote 118: In τοὺς δὲ there is an anacoluthon similar to the
   one in vs. 459]

As a bull in the herd is greatly eminent above all, for he surpasses the
collected cattle, such on that day did Jove render Agamemnon,
distinguished amongst many, and conspicuous amongst heroes.

Tell me now, ye Muses, who possess the Olympian mansions (for ye are
goddesses, and are [ever] present, and ken all things, whilst we hear
but a rumour, nor know anything[119]), who were the leaders and chiefs
of the Greeks. For I could not recount nor tell the multitude, not even
if ten tongues, and ten mouths were mine, [not though] a voice
unwearied,[120] and a brazen heart were within me; unless the Olympic
Muses, daughters of ægis-bearing Jove, reminded me of how many came to
Ilium. However, I will rehearse the commanders of the ships, and all the
ships.

   [Footnote 119: Cf. Æn. vii. 644:--

       "Et meministis enim, Divæ, et memorare potestis:
        Ad nos vix tenuis famæ perlabitur aura."

   Milton, Par. Lost, i. 27:--

       "Say first, for Heav'n hides nothing from thy view,
        Nor the deep tract of Hell----"]

   [Footnote 120: Cf. Æn. vi. 625 sqq.; Georg. ii. 42; Valer. Flacc,
   vi. 36; Silius, iv. 527; Claudian, 6 Cons. Hon. 436. This
   hyperbolical mode of excusing poetic powers is ridiculed by
   Persius, Sat. vi. 1.]

                      THE CATALOGUE OF THE SHIPS.

Peneleus, and Leïtus, and Arcesilaus, and Prothoënor, and Clonius,
commanded the Bœotians; both those who tilled Hyrie, and rocky Aulis,
and Schœnos, and Scholos, and hilly Eteonus, Thespia, Græa, and the
ample plain of Mycalessus; and those who dwelt about Harma, and Ilesius,
and Erythræ; and those who possessed Elion, Hyle, Peteon, Ocalea, and
the well-built city Medeon, Copæ, Eutressis, and Thisbe abounding in
doves; and those who possessed Coronæa, and grassy Haliartus, and
Platæa; and those who inhabited Glissa, and those who dwelt in
Hypothebæ, the well-built city, and in sacred Onchestus, the beauteous
grove of Neptune; and those who inhabited grape-clustered Arne, and
those [who inhabited] Midea, and divine Nissa, and remote Anthedon:
fifty ships of these went to Troy, and in each embarked a hundred and
twenty Bœotian youths.

Those who inhabited Aspledon, and Minyean Orchomenus, these Ascalaphus
and Ialmenus, the sons of Mars, led, whom Astyoche bore to powerful Mars
in the house of Actor, son of Azis: a modest virgin, when she ascended
the upper part of her father's house; but the god secretly embraced her.
Of these thirty hollow ships went in order.

Moreover, Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of magnanimous Iphitus, the son
of Naubolus, led the Phoceans, who possessed Cyparissus, and rocky
Python, and divine Crissa, and Daulis, and Panopea; and those who dwelt
round Anemoria and Hyampolis, and near the sacred river Cephissus, and
those who possessed Lilæa, at the sources of Cephissus: with these forty
dark ships followed. They indeed,[121] going round, arranged the lines
of the Phoceans; and they were drawn up in array near the Bœotians, and
towards the left wing.

   [Footnote 121: Schedius and Epistrophus.]

Swift-footed Ajax, the son of Oileus, was leader of the Locrians; less
in stature than, and not so tall as Ajax, the son of Telamon, but much
less. He was small indeed, wearing a linen corslet, but in [the use of]
the spear he surpassed all the Hellenes and Achæans, who inhabited
Cynus, Opus, Calliarus, Bessa, Scarpha, and pleasant Augeia, and Tarpha,
and Thronium, around the streams of Boagrius. But with him forty dark
ships of the Locrians followed, who dwell beyond sacred Eubœa.

The Abantes, breathing strength, who possessed Eubœa, and Chalcis, and
Eretria, and grape-clustered Histiæa, and maritime Cerinthus, and the
towering city of Dium, and those who inhabited Carystus and Styra: the
leader of these was Elephenor, of the line of Mars, the son of
Chalcodon, the magnanimous prince of the Abantes. With him the swift
Abantes followed, with flowing locks behind, warriors skilled with
protended spears of ash, to break the corslets on the breasts of their
enemies. With him forty dark ships followed.

Those besides who possessed Athens, the well-built city, the state of
magnanimous Erechtheus, whom Minerva, the daughter of Jove, formerly
nursed (but him the bounteous earth brought forth), and settled at
Athens in her own rich temple: there the sons of the Athenians, in
revolving years, appease her with [sacrifices of] bulls and
lambs[122]--them Menestheus, son of Peteus, commanded. "No man upon the
earth was equal to him in marshalling steeds and shielded warriors in
battle; Nestor alone vied with him, for he was elder. With him fifty
dark ships followed."

But Ajax[123] led twelve ships from Salamis, and leading arranged them
where the phalanxes of the Athenians were drawn up.

   [Footnote 122: Grote, Hist. of Greece, vol. i. p. 75, observes,
   "Athene is locally identified with the soil and people of Athens,
   even in the Iliad: Erechtheus, the Athenian, is born of the
   earth, but Athene brings him up, nourishes him, and lodges him in
   her own temple, where the Athenians annually worship him with
   sacrifice and solemnities. It was altogether impossible to make
   Erechtheus son of Athene,--the type of the goddess forbade it;
   but the Athenian myth-creators, though they found this barrier
   impassable, strove to approach to it as near as they could."
   Compare also p. 262, where he considers Erechtheus "as a divine
   or heroic, certainly a superhuman person, and as identified with
   the primitive germination of Attic man."]

   [Footnote 123: The son of Telamon.]

Those who possessed Argos, and well-fortified Tiryns, Hermione, and
which encircle the Asine deep bay, Trœzene, and Eionæ, and vine-planted
Epidaurus, and those who possessed Ægina, and Mases, Achæan youths.
Their leader then was Diomede, brave in war, and Sthenelus, the dear son
of much-renowned Capaneus; and with these went Euryalus the third,
god-like man, the son of king Mecisteus, Talaus' son; and all these
Diomede brave in war commanded. With these eighty dark ships followed.

Those who possessed Mycenæ, the well-built city, and wealthy
Corinth,[124] and well-built Cleonæ, and those who inhabited Ornia, and
pleasant Aræthyrea, and Sicyon, where Adrastus first reigned: and those
who possessed Hyperesia, and lofty Gonoessa, and Pellene, and those who
[inhabited] Ægium, and all along the sea-coast,[125] and about spacious
Helice. Of these, king Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, commanded a
hundred ships: and with him by far the most and bravest troops followed;
and he had clothed himself in dazzling brass, exulting in his glory,
that he shone conspicuous amongst all heroes; for he was the most
eminent, and led by far the most numerous troops.[126]

   [Footnote 124: An anachronism, as Corinth, before its capture by
   the Dorians, was called Ephyra (as in II. vi. 152). "Neque est,
   quod miremur ab Homero nominari Corinthum, nam ex persona poetæ
   et hanc urbem, et quasdam Ionum colonias iis nominibus appellat,
   quibus vocabantur ætate ejus, multo post Ilium captum
   conditæ."--Vell. Paterc. i. 3.]

   [Footnote 125. I. e. the later Achaia.--Arnold.]

   [Footnote 126: On the superior power of Agamemnon, see Grote,
   vol. i. p. 211 and compare II. ix. 69.]

But those who possessed great Lacedæmon, full of clefts, and Pharis and
Sparta, and dove-abounding Messa, and Brysiæ, and pleasant Augeiæ; and
those who possessed Amyclæ, and Helos, a maritime city; and those who
possessed Laas, and dwelt round Œtylus. Of these his brother Menelaus,
brave in battle, commanded sixty ships, but they were armed apart [from
Agamemnon's forces]. Amidst them he himself went, confiding in his
valour, inciting them to war; but especially he desired in his soul to
avenge the remorse of Helen and her groans.

Those who inhabited Pylos and pleasant Arene, and Thryos, by the fords
of Alphœus, and well-built Æpy, and Cyparesseis and Amphigenia, and
Pteleum, and Helos, and Dorium: and there it was the Muses, meeting the
Thracian Thamyris, as he was coming from Œchalia, from Œchalian Eurytus,
caused him to cease his song; for he averred, boasting, that he could
obtain the victory,[127] even though the Muses themselves, the daughters
of ægis-bearing Jove, should sing. But they, enraged, made him blind,
and moreover deprived him of his power of singing, and caused him to
forget the minstrel-art. These the Gerenian horseman Nestor commanded:
and with him ninety hollow ships proceeded in order.

Those who possessed Arcadia, under the breezy[128] mountain of Cyllene,
near the tomb of Æpytus, where are close-fighting heroes; those who
inhabited Pheneus, and sheep-abounding Orchomenus, and Ripe and Stratie,
and wind-swept Enispe, and who possessed Tegea and pleasant Mantinea;
and those who held Stymphalus, and dwelt in Parrhasie; of these king
Agapenor, the son of Ancæus, commanded sixty ships; but aboard each ship
went many Arcadian heroes skilled in war. But the son of Atreus,
Agamemnon himself, the king of heroes, gave them the well-benched ships,
to pass over the dark sea; since they had no care of naval works.

   [Footnote 127: Respecting the connection of this story with the
   early poetic contests, see Müller, Gk. Lit. iv. 2, whose
   interesting remarks are, unfortunately, too long for a note.]

   [Footnote 128: i. e. lofty.]

Those who inhabited Buprasium and noble Elis, as much as Hyrmine, and
distant Myrsinus, and the Olenian rock, and Alisium, contain within; of
these the leaders were four; but ten swift ships followed each hero, and
many Epeans went aboard them. Amphimachus and Thalpius, sons, the one of
Cteatus, the other of Eurytus, Actor's son, commanded some: brave
Diores, son of Amarynceus, commanded others: and god-like Polyxenus, son
of Agasthenes, the son of king Augeas, commanded the fourth division.

Those from Dulichium, and the Echinades, sacred islands, which lie
beyond the sea, facing Elis.[129] Over these presided Meges, son of
Phyleus, equal to Mars, whom the knight Phyleus, beloved by Jove, begat,
who, enraged against his father, once on a time removed to Dulichium.
With him forty dark ships followed.

Moreover Ulysses led the magnanimous Cephallenians, those who possessed
Ithaca and leaf-quivering Neritos, and who dwelt in Crocylea and rugged
Ægilips, and those who possessed Zacynthus, and those who inhabited
Samos, and those who possessed the continent, and dwelt in the places
lying opposite; these Ulysses commanded, equal to Jove in council. With
him followed twelve red-sided ships.

Thoas, son of Andræmon, led the Ætolians, those who inhabited Pleuron,
and Olenus, and Pylene, and maritime Chalcis, and rocky Calydon. For the
sons of magnanimous Œneus were no more, nor was he himself surviving;
moreover, fair-haired Meleager was dead.[130] To him [Thoas,] therefore,
was intrusted the chief command, to rule the Ætolians, and with him
forty dark ships followed.

   [Footnote 129: "This description of the Echinades has something
   equivocal in it, which is cleared up, if we suppose it addressed
   to the inhabitants of the Asiatic side of the Archipelago. But
   if, with Pope, we understand the words 'beyond the sea' to relate
   to Elis, I think we adopt an unnatural construction to come at a
   forced meaning; for the old Greek historians tell us, that those
   islands are so close upon the coast of Elis, that in their time
   many of them had been joined to it by means of the
   Achelous."--Wood on Homer, p. 8, sq.]

   [Footnote 130: Grote, Hist, of Greece, vol. i. p. 197, after
   referring to the Homeric legend respecting Meleager in II. xi.
   525, sqq., remarks that "though his death is here indicated only
   indirectly, there seems little doubt that Homer must have
   conceived the death of the hero as brought about by the maternal
   curse: the unrelenting Erinnys executed to the letter the
   invocations of Althæa, though she herself must have been willing
   to retract them."]

Spear-renowned Idomeneus commanded the Cretans, those who possessed
Gnossus and well-walled Gortyna and Lyctos, and Miletus, and white
Lycastus and Phæstus, and Rhytium, well-inhabited cities; and others who
inhabited the hundred-towned Crete. These spear-famed Idomeneus
commanded, and Meriones, equal to man-slaying Mars: with these followed
eighty dark ships.

But Tlepolemus, the brave and great descendant of Hercules, led from
Rhodes nine ships of the haughty Rhodians, those who inhabited Rhodes,
arranged in three bands, Lindus, and Ialyssus, and white Camirus. These
spear-famed Tlepolemus led, he whom Astyochea brought forth to the might
of Hercules,[131] whom [Astyochea] he [Hercules] carried out of Ephyre,
from the river Selleis, after having laid waste many cities of
nobly-descended youths. Now Tlepolemus, after he had been trained up in
the well-built palaces, straightway slew the beloved uncle of his
father, Licymnius, now grown old, a branch of Mars; and instantly he
built a fleet; and having collected many troops, he departed,[132]
flying over the ocean; for him the sons and grandsons of the might of
Hercules had threatened. And he indeed came wandering to Rhodes,
suffering woes. And they, divided into three parts, dwelt in tribes, and
were beloved of Jove, who rules over gods and men: and on them the son
of Saturn poured down immense wealth.

   [Footnote 131: As in the Odyssey, I prefer preserving the quaint
   simplicity of these antiquated periphrases.]

   [Footnote 132: Grote, History of Greece, vol. i. p. 33, has
   collected the Homeric instances of exile "for private or
   involuntary homicide," observing, however, from the Schol. on Il.
   xi. 690, "that Homer never once describes any of them to have
   either received or required purification for the crime."]

Nireus moreover led three equal ships from Syme, Nireus son of Aglaea,
and king Charopus, Nireus, the fairest of men that came to Ilium, of all
the other Greeks, next to the unblemished son of Peleus. But he was
feeble, and few troops followed him.

But those who possessed Nisyrus, and Crapathus, and Casus, and Cos, the
city of Eurypylus, and the Calydnæ isles, Phidippus and Antiphus, both
sons of the Thessalian king, the son of Hercules, commanded. Thirty
hollow ships of these went in order.

But now, [O muse, recount] those, as many as inhabited Pelasgian Argos,
both those who dwelt in Alos and Alope, and Trechin, and those who
possessed Phthia, and Hellas famous for fair dames. But they are called
Myrmidons, and Hellenes, and Achæans: of fifty ships of these was
Achilles chief. But they remembered not dire-sounding war, for there was
no one who might lead them to their ranks. For swift-footed Achilles lay
at the ships, enraged on account of the fair-haired maid Brisëis, whom
he carried away from Lyrnessus, after having suffered many labours, and
having laid waste Lyrnessus and the walls of Thebes; and he killed
Mynetes and spear-skilled Epistrophus, sons of king Evenus, the son of
Selepius. On her account he lay grieving, but speedily was he about to
be roused.

Those who possessed Phylace and flowery Pyrrhasus, the consecrated
ground of Ceres, and Iton the mother of sheep, maritime Antron, and
grassy Ptelon. These warlike Protesilaus, whilst he lived, commanded;
but him the black earth then possessed. His wife, lacerated all around,
had been left at Phylace, and his palace half finished. For a Trojan man
slew him, as he leaped ashore from his ship much the first of the
Greeks. Nor were they, however, without a leader, although they longed
for their own leader; for gallant Podarces marshalled them, Podarces,
son of sheep-abounding Iphiclus, the son of Phylacis, own brother of
magnanimous Protesilaus, younger by birth; but the warlike hero
Protesilaus was older and braver. His troops wanted not a leader, but
lamented him, being brave; with him forty dark ships followed.

Those who inhabited Phære by the lake Bœbeïs, Bœbe, and Glaphyræ, and
well-built Iaolcus; these Eumeles, the beloved son of Admetus, commanded
in eleven ships, whom Alcestis, divine amongst women, most beautiful in
form of the daughters of Pelias, brought forth by Admetus.

Those who inhabited Methone and Thaumacia, and possessed Melibœa, and
rugged Olizon; these Philoctetes, well skilled in archery, commanded in
seven ships. Fifty sailors, well skilled in archery, went on board each
to fight valiantly. But he lay in an island enduring bitter pangs, in
divine Lemnos, where the sons of the Greeks had left him suffering with
the evil sting of a deadly serpent. There he lay grieving; but soon were
the Argives at the ships destined to remember their king Philoctetes.
Nor were they however without a leader, though they longed for their own
leader; but Medon, the bastard son of Oïleus, whom Rhina brought forth
by city-wasting Oïleus, marshalled them.

Those who possessed Tricca, and hilly Ithome, and those who possessed
Œchalia, the city of Œchalian Eurytus; Podalirius and Machaon, two
excellent physicians,[133] both sons of Æsculapius, led these. With them
thirty hollow ships went in order.

   [Footnote 133: Grote, vol. i. p. 348, remarks that the "renown of
   Podalirius and Machaon was further prolonged in the subsequent
   poem of Arctinus, the Iliu-Persis, wherein the one was
   represented as unrivalled in surgical operations, the other as
   sagacious in detecting and appreciating morbid symptoms. It was
   Podalirius who first noticed the glaring eyes and disturbed
   deportment which preceded the suicide of Ajax."]

Those who possessed Ormenium, and the fountain Hyperia, and those who
possessed Asterium and the white tops of Titanus; these Eurypylus, the
brave son of Evæmon, commanded. With him forty dark ships followed.

Those who possessed Argissa, and inhabited Gyrtone, and Orthe, and
Elone, and the white city Oloosson: these the stout warrior Polypœtes,
son of Pirithous, whom immortal Jove begat, commanded. Him renowned
Hippodamia brought forth by Pirithous, on the day when he took vengeance
on the shaggy Centaurs, and drove them from Mount Pelion, and chased
them to the Æthiceans. He was not the only leader; with him commanded
warlike Leonteus, son of magnamimous Coronus, the son of Cœneus. With
these forty dark ships followed.

But Gyneus led two-and-twenty ships from Cyphus. Him the Enienes
followed, and the Peræbi, stout warriors, who placed their habitations
by chilly Dodona, and those who tilled the fields about delightful
Titaresius, which pours its fair-flowing stream into the Peneus; nor is
it mingled with silver-eddied Peneus, but flows on the surface of it
like oil. For it is a streamlet of the Stygian wave, the dreadful
[pledge of] oath.

Prothoüs, son of Tenthredon, commanded the Magnetes, who dwell about the
Peneus, and leaf-quivering Pelion: these swift Prothoüs led; and with
him forty dark ships followed.

These then were the leaders and chieftains of the Greeks. Do thou, then,
O muse, tell me who was the most excellent of these, of the kings and
their steeds, who followed the son of Atreus to Troy. The steeds of the
descendant of Pheres were indeed by far the most excellent, which
Eumelus drove, swift as birds, like in hair, like in age, and level in
[height of] back by the plumb-line.[134] These, bearing with them the
terror of Mars, both mares, silver-bowed Apollo fed in Pieria.[135] Of
the heroes Telamonian Ajax was by far the best, whilst Achilles
continued wrathful, for he was by far the bravest; and the steeds which
bore the irreproachable son of Peleus surpassed those of Eumelus. But he
on his part lay in his dark sea-traversing ships, breathing wrath
against the son of Atreus, Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people. But
his forces meantime amused themselves with quoits and javelins, hurling
[them,] and with their bows; and their steeds stood, each near his
chariot, feeding on lotus and lake-fed parsley. And the well-fastened
chariots lay in the tents of their lords. But they, longing for their
warlike chief, wandered hither and thither through the camp, and did not
fight.

But they went along, as if the whole earth was being fed upon by
fire,[136] and the earth groaned beneath, as in honour of
thunder-rejoicing Jove when angry,[137] when he strikes the earth around
Typhœus in Arimæ,[138] where they say is the tomb of Typhœus; thus
indeed beneath their feet the earth groaned mightily, as they went, and
very swift they passed over the plain.

   [Footnote 134: I. e. exactly equal in height, as if they had been
   measured.]

   [Footnote 135: This degradation of Apollo used to be commemorated
   in the theoria in honour of the god. See Müller Dor. vol. i. p.
   233.]

   [Footnote 136: Such was the glitter of their arms.]

   [Footnote 137: See Arnold.]

   [Footnote 138: A volcanic district of Mysia.]

But swift-footed Iris came from aegis-bearing Jove, a messenger to the
Trojans, with a woeful announcement. They all, collected together, both
young and old, were holding councils at the gates of Priam. But
swift-footed Iris standing near, accosted them: and she likened herself
in voice to Polites, son of Priam, who, trusting to the swiftness of his
feet, sat at watch for the Trojans on the top of the tomb[139] of old
Æsyetus, watching when the Greeks should set forth from the ships. To
him having likened herself, swift-footed Iris addressed them:

"Old man, ever are injudicious words pleasing to thee, as formerly in
time of peace: but now has an inevitable war arisen. Truly I have
already very often been present at the conflicts of heroes, but never
have I beheld such brave and numerous forces. For very like unto the
leaves or the sand proceed they through the plain, about to fight for
the city. Hector, for it is to thee in particular I give advice: and do
thou act thus; for many are the allies through the great city of Priam;
and different are the languages[140] of the widely-spread men. Let then
each hero command those of whom he is the chief: but do thou,
marshalling the citizens, be leader of them."

Thus she said. But Hector was not ignorant of the voice of the goddess;
and he instantly dismissed the council, and they rushed to arms. And the
portals were opened, and the troops rushed out, both foot and horse; and
much tumult arose.

Now there is a certain lofty mound before the city, far in the plain,
that may be run round,[141] which men indeed call Batiea, but the
immortals, the tomb of nimbly-springing Myrinna. There the Trojans and
their allies were then marshalled separately.

   [Footnote 139: On the height of the ancient tombs, see my note on
   Odyss. ii. p. 21, n. 35, ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 140: Cf. iv. 437, where this variety of dialects is
   again mentioned, and Müller, Greek Lit. i. § 4.]

   [Footnote 141: _I. e._ standing clear on all sides.]

The Trojans, in the first place, great helmet-nodding Hector, son of
Priam, commanded. With him far the most numerous and the bravest troops
were armed, ardent with their spears.

The Dardanians, in the next place, Æneas, the gallant son of Anchises,
commanded (him to Anchises the divine goddess Venus bore, couched with
him a mortal on the tops of Ida): not alone, but with him the two sons
of Antenor, Archelochus and Acamas, skilled in every kind of fight.

But the Trojans who inhabited Zeleia,[142] beneath the lowest foot of
Ida, wealthy and drinking the dark water of Æsepus, these Pandarus, the
valiant son of Lycaon, commanded, to whom even Apollo himself gave his
bow.

   [Footnote 142: Cf. iv. 119. "The inhabitants of Zeleia worshipped
   Apollo, and Zeleia was also called Lycia; facts which show that
   there was a real connection between the name of Lycia and the
   worship of Apollo, and that it was the worship of Apollo which
   gave the name to this district of Troy, as it had done to the
   country of the Solymi."--Müller, Dor. vol. i. p. 248.]

Those who possessed Adrestæ, and the city of Apæsus, and possessed
Pityea, and the lofty mountain Tercia; these Adrastus and linen-mailed
Amphius commanded, the two sons of Percosian Merops, who was skilled in
prophecy above all others; nor was he willing to suffer his sons to go
into the man-destroying fight. But they did not obey him, for the fates
of sable death impelled them.

Those who dwelt around Percote and Practius, and possessed Sestos and
Abydos, and divine Arisbe; these Asius, son of Hyrtacus, prince of
heroes, commanded: Asius, son of Hyrtacus, whom large and fiery steeds
bore from Arisbe, from the river Selleïs.

Hippothoüs led the tribes of the spear-skilled Pelasgians, of those who
inhabited fertile Larissa; Hippothoüs and Pylæus of the line of Mars,
the two sons of Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus, commanded these.

But Acamus and the hero Piroüs led the Thracians, all that the rapidly
flowing Hellespont confines within.

Euphemus, son of heaven-descended Trœzenus, son of Ceas, was commander
of the warlike Cicones.

But Pyræchmes led the Pæonians, who use darts fastened by a thong, far
from Amydon, from wide-flowing Axius, from Axius, whose stream is
diffused the fairest over the earth.

But the sturdy heart of Pylæmenes from the Eneti, whence is the race of
wild mules, led the Paphlagonians, those who possessed Cytorus, and
dwelt around Sesamus, and inhabited the famous dwellings around the
river Parthenius, and Cromna, Ægialus, and the lofty Erythine hills.

But Hodius and Epistrophus, far from Alybe, whence is a rich product of
silver, commanded the Halizonians. Chromis and the augur Ennomus
commanded the Mysians, but he avoided not sable death through his skill
in augury, for he was laid low by the hands of Achilles in the river,
where he made havoc of the other Trojans also.

Phorcys and godlike Ascanius far from Ascania, led the Phrygians, and
they eagerly desired to engage in battle.

But Mesthles and Antiphus led the Mæonians, both sons of Talæmeneus,
whom the lake Gygæa bore; these led the Mæonians, born beneath Mount
Tmolus.

Nastes commanded the barbarous-voiced Carians, who possessed Miletus,
and the leaf-topped mountain of Pethiri, and the streams of Mæander, and
the lofty tops of Mycale. These indeed Amphimachus and Nastes commanded,
Nastes and Amphimachus the famous sons of Nomion, who foolish went to
battle decked with gold like a young girl[143]; nor did this by any
means ward off bitter death; but he was laid low by the hands of the
swift-footed son of Æacus at the river, and warlike Achilles took away
the gold.

   [Footnote 143: It was customary for virgins to wear golden
   ornaments in great profusion. See Porson on Eur. Hec. 153.]

But Sarpedon and gallant Glaucus from Lycia afar, from
the eddying Xanthus, led the Lycians.




                             BOOK THE THIRD


                                ARGUMENT.

Just as the armies are on the point of engaging, Paris proposes a single
combat, but, on Menelaus advancing, retires in affright. Being rebuked
by Hector, he consents to engage Menelaus, and a treaty is arranged.
Paris is vanquished, but is brought back safe to Ilium by Venus, who
appeases the anger of Helen. Menelaus, as conqueror, calls upon the
Trojans to fulfil the conditions of the challenge.


But after they had each been marshalled along with their leaders, the
Trojans, on the one hand, moved along with both clamour and
battle-shout, like birds; just as is the noise of cranes forth under
heaven, which, after they have escaped the winter and immeasurable[144]
shower, with a clamour do these wing their way towards the streams of
the ocean, bearing slaughter and fate to the Pygmæan men; and they then
at early dawn bring fatal strife. But the Greeks, on the other hand,
breathing might,[145] advanced in silence, anxious in mind to aid one
another.

   [Footnote 144: See Alberti on Hesych. s. v., t. i. p. 126; lit.
   "what even a god would not say."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 359.]

   [Footnote 145: Par. Lost, i. 559:

                              "----thus they,
            Breathing united force with fixed thought,
            Moved on in silence."]

As when the south wind sheds a mist over the top of a mountain, by no
means friendly to the shepherds, but more serviceable even than night
to the robber, and one can see [only] so far as he hurls a stone. So
under the feet of them proceeding an eddying dust kept rising: and very
speedily they traversed the plain.

But when they now were near, approaching each other, godlike Alexander
advanced in front of the Trojans, having a panther's skin on his
shoulders, and his crooked bow, and a sword; but he brandishing two
spears tipped with brass, challenged all the bravest of the Greeks to
fight against him in grievous conflict.

But when Mars-beloved Menelaus perceived him advancing before the host,
taking long strides, as a hungering lion exults, when happening on a
carcase of large size, having found either a horned stag or a wild goat.
For he greedily devours it, although swift hounds and vigorous youths
pursue him. Thus Menelaus rejoiced, having beheld with his eyes godlike
Alexander. For he thought he would be revenged upon the guilty wretch:
forthwith, therefore, with his arms he leaped from his chariot to the
earth.

But when, therefore, godlike Alexander perceived him appearing among the
foremost warriors, he was smitten in his heart, and gave way back into
the band of his companions, avoiding death. And as when any one having
seen a serpent in the thickets of a mountain, has started back, and
tremor has seized his limbs under him, and he has retired backwards, and
paleness seizes his cheeks: thus godlike Alexander shrank back into the
band of the haughty Trojans, dreading the son of Atreus.

But Hector having seen him, upbraided him with opprobrious words:
"Cursed Paris,[146] most excellent in form, thou woman-raving seducer,
would that thou hadst either not been born, or that thou hadst perished
unmarried. This, indeed, I would wish, and indeed it would be much
better, than that thou shouldst thus be a disgrace and scandal to
others. In truth the long-haired Achæans may laugh, having suspected
that thou wast a noble champion, because a fine person belongs [to
thee]; but there is not strength in thy soul, nor any nerve. Didst thou,
being such a one, having sailed over the ocean in sea-traversing ships,
having collected congenial associates, and mingled with foreigners, take
away a beauteous lady, from the Apian land, the spouse of martial men, a
great detriment to thy father, to the city, and to all the people; a joy
indeed to our enemies, but a disgrace to thyself? Couldst thou not have
awaited warlike Menelaus? Then shouldst thou have known of how brave a
man thou dost possess the blooming spouse. Nor will thy harp, and the
gifts of Venus, and thy hair, and thy figure avail thee, when thou shalt
be mingled with the dust.[147] But the Trojans are very pusillanimous;
else wouldst thou have been arrayed in a garment of stone, on account of
the evils which thou hast done." [148]

Him then godlike Alexander in turn addressed: "Hector, since thou hast
reproached me justly, and not unjustly, [I will submit]. Ever is thy
spirit unwearied, like an axe, which penetrates the wood, [driven] by
the man who with art cuts out the naval plank, and it increases the
force of the man: so in thy breast is there an intrepid heart. Reproach
me not with the lovely gifts of golden Venus: the distinguished gifts of
the gods are by no means to be rejected, whatever indeed they give; for
no one can choose them at his own pleasure. Now, however, if thou
desirest me to wage war and to fight, cause the other Trojans and all
the Greeks to sit down, but match me and Mars-beloved Menelaus to
contend in the midst for Helen and all the treasures. And whichever of
us shall conquer, and shall be superior, having received all the
treasures without reserve, and the woman, let him conduct them home. But
let the rest of you, striking a friendship and faithful league, inhabit
fertile Troy; and let them return to the steed-nourishing Argos, and
fair-damed Achaia."

   [Footnote 146: Δὑς here denotes the evils which fatally resulted
   to Paris and his friends (so δυσελένας, "baleful Helen," Eur. Or.
   1388. Cf. Æsch. Ag. 689, sqq.) in consequence of his having been
   preserved, despite the omens attending his birth. See Hygin. Fab.
   xci. Hence the Schol. on Il. x. i. 96, derive his name of Paris,
   ὅτι τὸν μόνον παοῆλθεν.]

   [Footnote 147: Cf. Hor. Od. i. 15, 13:--

            "Nequicquam, Veneris præsidio ferox,
            Pectes cæsariem, grataque feminis
            Imbelli cithara carmina divides: . . .
            . . . tamen, heu! sorus adulteros
            Crines pulvere collines."]

   [Footnote 148: _I. e._ thou wouldst have been stoned to death.]

Thus he spoke, but Hector on the other hand rejoiced greatly, having
heard his speech; and having advanced into the centre, holding his spear
by the middle, he restrained the phalanxes of the Trojans, and they all
sat down. Against him the waving-haired Achæans were directing their
bows, and taking aim, were going to hurl with shafts and with stones.
But Agamemnon, he,[149] the king of men, exclaimed aloud:

   [Footnote 149: Mark the force of the pronoun.]

"Withhold, Argives! cast not, ye sons of the Aenæans; for helm-nodding
Hector stands as if intending to propose something."

Thus he spoke; but they abstained from battle, and instantly became
silent. But Hector between both [armies] spoke thus:

"Hear from me, ye Trojans, and well-greaved Greeks, the proposal of
Alexander, on whose account this strife has arisen. He advises that the
other Trojans and all the Greeks should lay down their beauteous arms
upon the bounteous earth; but that he and Mars-beloved Menelaus alone
should fight in the midst for Helen and all the treasures; and whichever
shall conquer, and shall be superior, having received all the treasures
without reserve, and the woman, let him conduct them home: but let the
rest of us strike a friendship and faithful league."

Thus he said, and all became mute in silence. But amidst them Menelaus,
valiant in the din of war, thus spoke:

"Now hear me also; for anguish has invaded my soul most: but I purpose
that the Greeks and Trojans should now be separated, since ye have
suffered many evils on account of my quarrel and the beginning of [this
strife through] Alexander. And to whichever of us death and fate has
been ordained, let him die; but do the rest of you be very speedily
separated. And bring lambs--one white, the other black--to the Earth and
to the Sun; and we will bring another to Jove. Moreover ye shall bring
the might of Priam, that he may strike the league himself, for his sons
are overbearing and faithless; lest any one, by transgression, violate
the covenant of Jove. For the minds of younger men are ever fluctuating;
but for those among whom a senior is present, he looks at the same time
both backward and forward, in order that the best results may accrue to
both parties."

Thus he spoke. But both Greeks and Trojans rejoiced, hoping to have
respite from grievous war. And they accordingly reined back their horses
to the ranks [of the foot], but dismounted themselves, and put off
their arms, and laid them down on the ground near each other; and around
[each pile of arms] there was a little space.

But Hector despatched two heralds to the city with speed, to bring the
lambs, and to call Priam. While, on the other hand, king Agamemnon sent
Talthybius to go to the hollow ships, and ordered him to bring a lamb.
And he did not disobey noble Agamemnon.

And meantime came Iris a messenger to white-armed Helen, likening
herself to her husband's sister, the wife of Antenor's son, most
excelling in beauty of the daughters of Priam, Laodice, whom the son of
Antenor, king Helicaon, possessed. But she found her in her palace, and
she was weaving an ample web, a double [mantle],[150] resplendent, and
on it was working many labours both of the horse-taming Trojans and the
brazen-mailed Greeks, which on her account they suffered at the hands of
Mars. Standing near, the swift-footed Iris accosted her thus:

"Come hither, dear lady,[151] that thou mayest view the wondrous deeds
of the horse-taming Trojans, and of the brazen-mailed Greeks, who
formerly against each other waged tearful war in the plain, eager for
destructive battle. Now, however, they sit in silence (and the war has
ceased), leaning on their shields, and near them their long spears are
fixed. But Alexander and Mars-beloved Menelaus are about to fight for
thy sake with their long spears, and thou shalt be called the dear wife
of him who conquers."

Thus having spoken, the goddess infused a tender desire into her mind
both of her former husband, and of her city, and her parents. And
instantly veiling herself in white linen robes,[152] she rushed from her
chamber, shedding a tender tear: not alone, for two domestics
accompanied her, Œthra, daughter of Pittheus, and large-eyed Clymene.
Then they quickly came to where the Scæan gates were. But Priam and
Panthous, and Thymœtes, Lampus, Clytius, Hicetaon, an offshoot of Mars,
Ucalegon, and Antenor, both prudent, elders of the people, sat at the
Scæan gates, long since desisting from war, through old age: but good
orators, like unto the Cicadæ,[153] which, in the woods, sitting on a
tree, send forth a delicate voice; such leaders of the Trojans at that
time were sitting on the tower. But when they saw Helen coming to the
tower, in low tone they addressed to each other winged words:

   [Footnote 150: By χλαιναν is understood a mantle which could be
   worn doubled. Others suppose it means cloth of double tissue.]

   [Footnote 151: An affectionate use of the word νύμϕα, which
   properly means a bride or young wife.]

   [Footnote 152: The plural is used to denote a long, flowing
   robe.]

   [Footnote 153: some the cicada or τεττιξ, this is to be
   considered to be the balm-cricket.]

"It is not a subject for indignation, that Trojans and well-greaved
Greeks endure hardships for a long time on account of such a woman. In
countenance she is wondrous like unto the immortal goddess, but even so,
although being such, let her return in the ships, nor be left a
destruction to us and to our children hereafter."

Thus they spoke. But Priam called Helen,--"Coming hither before us, dear
daughter, sit by me, that thou mayest see thy former husband, thy
kindred, and thy friends--(thou art not at all in fault towards me; the
gods, in truth, are in fault towards me, who have sent against me the
lamentable war of the Greeks)--that thou mayest name for me this mighty
man, who is this gallant and tall Grecian hero. Certainly there are
others taller in height; but so graceful a man have I never yet beheld
with my eyes, nor so venerable; for he is like unto a kingly man."

But him Helen, one of the divine women, answered in [these] words:
"Revered art thou and feared by me, dear father-in-law; would that an
evil death had pleased me, when I followed thy son hither, having left
my marriage-bed, my brothers, my darling[154] daughter, and the
congenial company of my equals. But these things were not done:
therefore I pine away with weeping. But this will I tell thee, which
thou seekest of me and inquirest. This is wide-ruling Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, in both characters,[155] a good king and a brave warrior. He was
the brother-in-law, moreover, of shameless me, if ever indeed he
was." [156]

   [Footnote 154: See Buttm. Lexil. s. v. and Arnold.]

   [Footnote 155: Observe the force of the neuter.]

   [Footnote 156: "_Si unquam fuit, quod nunc non est ampleus_.
   i.e. _si recte dici potest fuisse, quod ita sui factum est
   dissimile, ut fuisse unquam vix credas_."--Herm. on Vig. p. 946,
   quoted by Anthon.]

Thus she spoke. But him the old man admired, and said "O blessed son of
Atreus, happy-born, fortunate, truly indeed were many Achæan youths made
subject to thee. Before now I entered vine-bearing Phrygia, where I
beheld many Phrygians, heroes on fleet horses, the forces of Otreus and
godlike Mygdon, who encamped there near the banks of the Sangarius. For
I also, being an ally, was numbered with them on that day, when the
man-opposing Amazons came. But not even these were so numerous as the
black-eyed Greeks."

But next perceiving[157] Ulysses, the old man asked her: "Come, tell me
of this one also, dear daughter, who he is? he is less indeed in
height[158] than Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, but is broader to behold
in shoulders and breast. His arms lie up on the fertile earth, but he
himself, like a ram, goes round the ranks of the men. I for my part
compare him to a thick-fleeced ram, which wanders through a great flock
of snowy sheep."

   [Footnote 157: This whole passage may be compared with the
   similar enumeration and description of the seven Argive
   chieftains in Eurip. Phœn. 119, sqq.]

   [Footnote 158: Not "a head less" in height; for line 169 would
   then mean that Agamemnon was a head less than others, and
   consequently Ulysses would be two heads under the ordinary size.
   Anthon has adopted this common mistake, although Wolf had pointed
   it out.]

But him Helen, sprung from Jove, answered: "Now, this one again is the
son of Laertes, much-scheming Ulysses, who was bred in the country of
Ithaca, rugged though it be, skilled in all kinds of stratagems and
prudent counsels."

Her then the sage Antenor addressed in reply: "O lady, assuredly hast
thou spoken this word very truly: for already in former times divine
Ulysses came hither also, on an embassy concerning thee, with
Mars-beloved Menelaus. I received them as guests, and entertained them
in my palace, and became acquainted with the genius of both, and their
prudent counsels; but when they were mingled with the assembled Trojans,
Menelaus indeed overtopped him, as they stood by his broad shoulders;
but when both were sitting, Ulysses was more majestic.[159] But when
they began to weave words and counsels for all, Menelaus, on his part,
would harangue very fluently; a few [words] indeed, but very sweetly,
since he was not loquacious, nor a random talker, though he was younger
in age. But when much-counselling Ulysses arose, he stood and looked
down, fixing his eyes on the earth, but he neither moved his sceptre
backwards nor forwards, but held it unmoved like an unskilful man: you
would say indeed that he was a very irritable man, as well as devoid of
reason. But when he did send forth the mighty voice from his breast, and
words like unto wintry flakes of snow, no longer then would another
mortal contend with Ulysses. And beholding, we then marvelled not so
much at the aspect of Ulysses, [as at his words]."

   [Footnote 159: Observe the Attic construction, where the genitive
   would have been expected. So Od. M. 73. Il. ii 317. Compared by
   Lesbonax, περὶ σχημ. p. 183, sq. ed. Valck. See, also, my note on
   Æsch. Prom, p. 8, ed. Bohn; intpp. on Theocrit. i. 48.]

Then in the third place, having beheld Ajax, the old man asked: "Who is
that other Achæan hero, valiant and great, out-topping the Argives by
his head and broad shoulders?"

But him long-robed Helen answered, divine of women: "This indeed is
mighty Ajax, the bulwark of the Achæans: on the other side, amongst the
Cretans, stands Idomeneus like unto a god: but around him the leaders of
the Cretans are collected. Often did Mars-beloved Menelaus entertain him
in our palace, when he would come from Crete. But now I behold all the
other rolling-eyed Greeks, whom I could easily recognize, and pronounce
their names; but two leaders of the people I cannot see: horse-taming
Castor, and Pollux skilled in boxing, twin brothers, whom the same
mother brought forth with me. Either they have not followed from
pleasant Lacedæmon, or they indeed have followed hither in the
sea-traversing ships, but now are reluctant to enter the fight of the
heroes, fearing the disgrace, and the many reproaches which are mine."

Thus she spoke; but them the life-bestowing earth already possessed:
there in Lacedæmon, in their dear native land.[160]

   [Footnote 160: They had fallen in combat with Lynceus and Idas,
   whilst besieging Sparta.--Hygin. Poet. Ast. ii. 22. According,
   however, to other mythologists, they shared immortality in turns.
   See Od. xi. 302. Virg. Æu. vi. 121; with Servius, and Apollodor.
   iii. ll. 2.]

But heralds through the city were bearing the firm pledges of the gods,
two lambs and joyous wine, the fruit of the earth, in a goat-skin
flagon. But the herald Idæus also brought a splendid goblet, and golden
cups; and standing by him, incited the old man in these words:

"Arise, son of Laomedon; the chiefs of the horse-breaking Trojans, and
of the brazen-mailed Greeks, call thee to descend into the plain, that
thou mayest ratify a faithful league. For Alexander and Mars-beloved
Menelaus are about to fight with long spears for the woman. But let the
woman and the effects attend the conqueror; but let the rest of us,
having struck a friendship and faithful league, inhabit fruitful Troy,
and they shall return to horse-feeding Argos, and to Achaia, famed for
fair dames."

Thus he said, but the old man shuddered, and ordered his attendants to
yoke his horses; and they briskly obeyed. Priam then mounted his
chariot, and drew back the reins: and beside him Antenor mounted the
beautiful chariot. So they guided their fleet steeds through the Scæan
gates, towards the plain.

But when they had now come between the Trojans and the Greeks,
descending from their steeds to the fruitful earth, they advanced into
the midst of the Trojans and Greeks. Then Agamemnon, king of heroes,
immediately arose, and much-counselling Ulysses arose. But the
illustrious heralds collected together the faithful pledges of the gods,
and mixed wine in a bowl, and poured water upon the hands of the kings.
And the son of Atreus, drawing with his hands his dagger, which was
always suspended at the huge sheath of his sword, cut off hairs from the
heads of the lambs: and then the heralds distributed them to the chiefs
of the Trojans and the Greeks. Amongst them the son of Atreus prayed
earnestly, having stretched forth his hands:

"O father Jove, ruling from Ida, most glorious, most mighty,--and thou,
O sun, who beholdest all things, and nearest all things--and ye rivers,
and thou earth, and ye below who punish men deceased, whosoever swears
with perjury, be ye witnesses and preserve the faithful league. If, on
the one hand, Alexander should slay Menelaus, let him thenceforth retain
Helen and all her possessions; but let us return in our sea-traversing
ships. But if, on the contrary, yellow-haired Menelaus slay Alexander,
let the Trojans then restore Helen and all her treasures, and pay a fine
to the Argives such as is just, and which may be [recorded] amongst
posterity. But if Priam and the sons of Priam will not pay me the fine,
on Alexander falling, then will I afterwards fight on account of the
fine, remaining here till I find an end of the war."

He spoke, and cut the throats of the lambs with the cruel steel, and he
laid them on the earth panting, wanting life; for the brass had taken
away their [vital] strength. Then having drawn wine from the goblet,
they poured it into the cups, and prayed to the immortal gods. But thus
some one of the Greeks and Trojans said:

"O Jove, most glorious, most mighty, and ye other immortal gods, whoever
first shall offend against the leagues, so let the brain of themselves
and of their children stream upon the ground like this wine, and let
their wives be mingled with other men."

Thus they said, nor yet did the son of Saturn ratify [their vows]. Then
Priam, the son of Dardanus, addressed them:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, and ye well-greaved Greeks: I, indeed, return
again to wind-swept Ilion, since I can by no means endure to behold with
these eyes my dear son fighting with Mars-beloved Menelaus. Jove,
certainly, knows this, and the other immortal gods, to which of them the
event of death is destined."

He spoke, and the godlike man placed the lambs in the chariot, and
ascended himself, and drew back the reins; and beside him Antenor
mounted the very beautiful chariot. They on their part returning went
back towards Ilion.

But Hector on the other hand, the son of Priam, and divine Ulysses,
first measured the ground; then taking the lots, they shook them in the
brazen helmet, [to decide] which should hurl the brazen spear first. But
the people meantime supplicated, and stretched forth their hands to the
gods; and thus some one of the Greeks and Trojans said:

"O father Jove, ruling from Ida, most glorious, most mighty, whichever
has caused these evil works to both sides, grant that he, being slain,
may enter the house of Pluto, but that to us, on the other hand, there
may be friendship and a faithful league."

Thus then they spoke, and now mighty helm-quivering Hector shook the
lots, looking backward; and quickly the lot of Paris leaped forth. They
then sat down in their ranks, where the fleet steeds of each stood, and
their varied arms lay. But divine Alexander, the husband of fair-haired
Helen, put on his beauteous armour around his shoulders. In the first
place, around his legs he placed his beautiful greaves fitted with
silver clasps; then again he put on his breast the corslet of his
brother Lycaon, for it fitted him; but around his shoulders he slung his
brazen, silver-studded sword and then his huge and solid shield. But on
his valiant head he placed a well-wrought helmet, crested with
horse-hair, and the crest nodded dreadfully from above; and he grasped
his doughty spear, which fitted to his hands. In this same manner the
martial Menelaus put on his arms.

But they, when they were armed from each side of the throne, advanced to
the middle between the Trojans and Greeks, looking dreadfully; and
amazement seized the beholders, both the horse-breaking Trojans and the
well-greaved Greeks. They then stood near in the measured-out space,
brandishing their spears, incensed against each other. Alexander ander
first hurled his long-shadowed spear, and smote the shield of the son of
Atreus, equal on all sides, nor did the brass break, for the point was
bent upon the strong shield: but next Menelaus, son of Atreus, commenced
the attack with his brazen spear, praying to father Jove:

"O king Jove, grant [me] to avenge myself [on him] who first injured me,
and subdue impious Alexander under my hands, that every one, even of
future men, may shudder to offer injury to a guest who may have afforded
[him] an hospitable reception."

He spoke; and brandishing, he hurled his long-shadowed spear, and smote
the shield of the son of Priam, equal on all sides; and through the
glittering shield went the impetuous spear, and was stuck firmly into
the deftly-wrought corslet: and the spear pierced right through his soft
tunic beside the flank: but he bent sideways, and evaded black death.
Next the son of Atreus having drawn his silver-studded sword, raising
it, struck the cone[161] of his helmet, but it fell from his hand
shivered round about into three or four pieces. And the son of Atreus
groaned aloud, looking towards the wide heaven:

   [Footnote 161: Buttmann, Lexil. p. 521, makes φαλος to be the
   same as κωνος, a metal ridge in which the plume was fixed.]

"O father Jove, none other of the gods is more baleful than thou.
Certainly I hoped to be revenged upon Alexander for his wickedness: but
now my sword has been broken in my hands, and my spear has been hurled
from my hand in vain, nor have I smote him."

He spoke; and rushing on, he seized him by the horse-hair tufted helmet,
and turning, began to drag him to the well-greaved Greeks: but the
richly-embroidered band under his tender throat was choking him, which
was drawn under his chin as the strap of his helmet. And now he had
dragged him away, and obtained infinite glory, had not Venus, the
daughter of Jove, quickly perceived it, who broke for him[162] the
thong, [made] from the hide of an ox slaughtered by violence: and
thereupon the empty helmet followed with his strong hand. It, then, the
hero whirling round, cast to the well-greaved Greeks, and his dear
companions took it up. And he [Menelaus] again rushed on, desiring to
slay him with his brazen spear: but him [Paris] Venus very easily, as
being a goddess, rescued, and covered him in a thick mist; then placed
him down in his fragrant chamber, exhaling perfumes.

   [Footnote 162: _I.e._ Menelaus.--to his confusion.]

But she herself, on the other hand, went to call Helen, and she found
her on the lofty tower, and many Trojan dames around her. Then with her
hand catching her by the fragrant mantle, she shook her: and likening
herself to an ancient dame, a spinner of wool, who used to comb fair
wool for her when dwelling at Lacedæmon, and she loved her much: to her
having likened herself, divine Venus accosted [Helen]:

"Come hither, Alexander calls thee to return home. He himself is in his
chamber and turned bed, shining both in beauty and attire; nor wouldst
thou say that he had returned after having fought with a hero, but that
he was going to the dance, or that just ceasing from the dance, he sat
down."

Thus she said, and agitated the heart in her breast: and when she beheld
the all-beauteous neck of the goddess, and her lovely bosom, and her
flashing eyes, she was awe-struck, and spoke a word, and said:

"Strange one! why dost thou desire to deceive me in these things? Wilt
thou lead me anywhere farther on to one of the well-inhabited cities,
either of Phrygia or pleasant Mæonia, if there be any of
articulately-speaking men dear to thee there? Is it because Menelaus,
having now conquered noble Alexander, wishes to bring hated me home,
that therefore with artful purpose thou now standest near me? Going,
sit with him thyself, and renounce the path of the gods. And mayest thou
no more return on thy feet to Olympus: but always grieve beside him, and
watch him, until he either make thee his consort, or he indeed [make
thee] his handmaid. But there I will not go to adorn his couch, for it
would be reprehensible: all the Trojan ladies henceforth will reproach
me. But I shall have woes without measure in my soul."

But her, divine Venus, incensed, thus addressed: "Wretch, provoke me
not, lest in my wrath I abandon thee, and detest thee as much as
heretofore I have wonderfully loved thee, and lest I scatter destructive
hate in the midst of the Trojans and Greeks, and thou perish by an evil
fate."

Thus she spoke: but Helen, sprung from Jove, dreaded, and she went
covered with a white transparent robe, in silence; and escaped the
notice of all the Trojan dames, for the goddess led the way.

But when they reached the very beautiful palace of Alexander, then the
maids, on their part, turned themselves speedily to their tasks; but
she, divine of women, ascended into her lofty-roofed chamber: and then
laughter-loving Venus, carrying, placed a seat for her opposite
Alexander: there Helen, daughter of the ægis-bearing Jove, sat, averting
her eyes, and reproached her husband with these words:

"Thou hast come from the war: would that thou hadst perished there,
slain by that brave hero, who was my former husband. Certainly, thou
didst formerly boast, that thou wast superior to Mars-beloved Menelaus,
in might, in hands, and at the spear. But go now, challenge Mars-beloved
Menelaus to fight once more against thee! But I advise thee to refrain,
nor unadvisedly wage war and fight against fair-haired Menelaus, lest
perchance thou mayest be subdued beneath his spear."

But her Paris answering addressed in words: "Woman! assail me not in
soul with reproachful taunts; for now indeed has Menelaus conquered by
Minerva's aid; but I in turn will vanquish him, for gods are with us
also. But come, let us delight in dalliance, reclining together, for
never before did love so fondly enwrap my soul, not even when formerly,
having borne thee away from pleasant Lacedæmon, I sailed in the
sea-traversing ships, and was united with thee in love and in the couch
in the island Cranaë; so now am I enamoured of thee, and sweet desire
possesses me."

He spoke, and led the way, ascending the couch; but his wife followed
with him: they therefore rested upon their perforated couch.

Meanwhile the son of Atreus was wandering through the crowd like to a
savage beast, if anywhere he could perceive godlike Alexander. But none
of the Trojans or their illustrious allies could then point out
Alexander to Mars-beloved Menelaus; for neither through friendship would
they have concealed him, if any one did see him; for he was hateful to
them all, like sable death. But amongst them spoke Agamemnon, king of
heroes:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, Greeks, and allies: the victory indeed appears [to
belong to] Mars-beloved Menelaus. Do ye therefore restore Argive Helen
and her treasures with her, and pay the fine which is fitting, and which
shall be remembered by future men."

Thus spoke the son of Atreus, and the other Greeks approved.




                           BOOK THE FOURTH


                              ARGUMENT.

_Paris not being slain, the combat left it doubtful whether Helen should
be returned or not; but Juno extorts a promise from Jove of the final
destruction of Troy. Minerva then persuades Pandarus to break the truce
by aiming an arrow at Menelaus. The wound is, however, cured by Machaon.
The Trojans proceed to the battle, while Agamemnon exhorts the
chieftains of the Greeks. The fight then commences, Mars and Apollo
encouraging the Trojans, Minerva and the other deities the Greeks._


Now they, the gods, sitting on the golden floor[163] with Jove, were
engaged in consultation, and amidst them venerable Hebe poured out the
nectar: but they pledged[164] one another with golden cups, looking
towards the city of the Trojans. Forthwith the son of Saturn attempted
to irritate Juno, speaking with a covert allusion, with reproachful
words:[165]

"Two goddesses, indeed, are auxiliaries to Menelaus, Argive[166] Juno
and Minerva of Alalcomenæ:[167] and yet these, forsooth, sitting apart,
amuse themselves with looking on; but to the other, on the contrary
[Paris], laughter-loving Venus is ever present,[168] and averts fate
from him. Even now has she saved him, thinking that he was about to die.
But the victory, indeed, belongs to Mars-beloved Menelaus: let us
therefore consult how these things shall be, whether we shall again
excite the destructive war, and dreadful battle-din, or promote
friendship between both parties. And if, moreover, this shall
perchance[169] be grateful and pleasing to all, the city of king Priam,
indeed, may be inhabited, but let Menelaus lead back again Argive
Helen."

   [Footnote 163: "On the golden floor of Jove's abode."--Cowper.]

   [Footnote 164: Athenæus, i. ll, εδεξιουντο, προπινοντες εαυτοις,
   ταις δεξιαις. Cf. xi. 14. Hesych. δειδεκτο, εδεξιουτο, δια φιλιας
   ησπαζετο και λογων.]

   [Footnote 165: I am indebted to Arnold for this version.]

   [Footnote 166: So called from her temple at Argos. See Pausan.
   ii. 17; Apul. Met. vi. p. 458; Servius on Æn. i. 28.]

   [Footnote 167: She had a temple at Alalcomenæ, in Bœotia. Cf.
   Pausan. ix. 33; Steph. Byz. ν. αλαλκομενιον.]

   [Footnote 168: On the affinity of βλωσκειν and μολεΐν, see
   Buttm. Lexil. p. 84.]

   [Footnote 169: Read αυ πως for αυτως, with Aristarchus, Wolf,
   Spitzner.]

Thus he spoke: but Minerva and Juno murmured with closed lips, for they
were sitting near, and were devising evils for the Trojans. Minerva,
indeed, was silent, nor said anything, indignant with her father Jove,
for dreadful rage possessed her. But Juno could not retain her fury in
her breast, but addressed him:

"Most baleful son of Saturn! what a sentence hast thou uttered! How dost
thou wish to render my labour vain, and my sweat fruitless, which I have
sweated through with toil? For the steeds are tired to me assembling the
host, evils to Priam and to his sons. Do so: but all we the other gods
do not approve."

But her cloud-compelling Jove, in great wrath, answered: "Strange one!
how now do Priam and the sons of Priam work so many wrongs against thee,
that thou desirest implacably to overturn the well-built city of Ilion?
But if thou, entering the gates and the lofty walls, couldst devour
alive[170] Priam and the sons of Priam, and the other Trojans, then
perhaps thou mightst satiate thy fury. Do as thou wilt, lest this
contention be in future a great strife between thee and me. But another
thing I tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thy soul: whenever haply I,
anxiously desiring, shall wish to destroy some city, where men dear to
thee are born, retard not my rage, but suffer me; for I have given thee
this of free will, though with unwilling mind. For of those cities of
earthly men, which are situated under the sun and the starry heaven,
sacred Ilion was most honoured by me in my heart, and Priam and the
people of Priam skilled in the ashen spear. For there my altars never
lacked a due banquet and libation, and savour; for this honour were we
allotted."

   [Footnote 170: Literally, "eat raw." Cf. Xenoph. Anab. iv. 8, 14.
   Τουτους ην πως δυνωμεθα, και ωμους δει καταφαγειν.--Clarke.]

Him then the venerable full-eyed Juno answered: "There are three cities,
indeed, most dear to me: Argos, and Sparta, and wide-wayed Mycenæ;[171]
destroy these whenever they become hateful to thy soul. In behalf of
these I neither stand forth, nor do I grudge them to thee: for even
were I to grudge them, and not suffer thee to destroy them, by grudging
I avail nothing, since thou art much more powerful. And yet it becomes
[thee] to render my labour not fruitless; for I am a goddess, and thence
my race, whence thine; and wily Saturn begat me, very venerable on two
accounts, both by my parentage, and because I have been called thy
spouse. Moreover, thou rulest amongst all the immortals. But truly let
us make these concessions to each other: I, on my part, to thee, and
thou to me; and the other immortal gods will follow. Do thou without
delay bid Minerva go to the dreadful battle-din of the Trojans and
Greeks, and contrive that the Trojans may first begin to injure the most
renowned Greeks, contrary to the leagues."

   [Footnote 171: "It certainly seems to me, that, in a reference so
   distinct to the three great Peloponnesian cities which the
   Dorians invaded and possessed, Homer makes as broad an allusion
   to the conquests of the Heraclidæ, not only as would be
   consistent with the pride of an Ionic Greek in attesting the
   triumphs of the national Dorian foe, but as the nature of a theme
   cast in a distant period, and remarkably removed, in its general
   conduct, from the historical detail of subsequent events, would
   warrant to the poet."--Bulwer, Athens, i. 8. The correctness of
   this view, however, depends upon the true date of Homer's
   existence.]

Thus she spoke; nor did the father of gods and men disobey. Instantly he
addressed Minerva in winged words:

"Go very quickly to the army, among the Trojans and Greeks, and contrive
that the Trojans may first begin to injure the most renowned Greeks,
contrary to the league."

Thus having spoken, he urged on Minerva already inclined; she hastening
descended the heights of Olympus; such as the star which the son of wily
Saturn sends, a sign either to mariners, or to a wide host of nations,
and from it many sparks are emitted. Like unto this Pallas Minerva
hastened to the earth, and leaped into the midst [of the army]; and
astonishment seized the horse-breaking Trojans and the well-greaved
Greeks, looking on. And thus would one say, looking at some other near
him:

"Doubtless evil war and dreadful battle-din will take place again, or
Jove is establishing friendship between both sides, he who has been
ordained the arbiter of war amongst men." [172]

   [Footnote 172: Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 20, compares the words of
   Belisarius in Procop. Vandal. i. Μαχονται μεν ανθρωποι, βραζευει
   δε ο Θεος οπως ποτε αυτω δοκει, και το του πολεμου δίδωσι
   κρατος.]

Thus then did some one of the Greeks and Trojans say; but she like a
hero entered the host of the Trojans, the brave warrior Laodocus, son of
Antenor, seeking godlike Pandarus, if anywhere she might find him. She
found the blameless and valiant son of Lycaon standing, and around him
the brave ranks of shielded warriors, who had followed him from the
streams of Æsepus; and standing near, she thus to him spoke winged
words:

"Wouldst thou now hearken to me in anything, O warlike son of Lycaon?
Thou wouldst venture then to aim a swift arrow at Menelaus. Doubtless
thou wouldst bear away both thanks and glory from all the Trojans, but
of all, chiefly from the prince Alexander, from whom, indeed, first of
all, thou wouldst receive splendid gifts, if he should see martial
Menelaus, the son of Atreus, subdued by this weapon, ascending the sad
pile. But come, aim an arrow at renowned Menelaus; and vow to
Lycian-born[173] Apollo, the renowned archer, that thou wilt sacrifice a
splendid hecatomb of firstling lambs, having returned home to the city
of sacred Zeleia."

   [Footnote 173: This is probably the true interpretation, and is
   given by the Scholiast, Hesychius, and others. But Heraclides,
   Alleg. § 6, says that Apollo is so called επειδη του κατα την
   ορθριον ωραν λυκαυγους εστιν αιτιοι, η οτι λυκαζαντα γεννα,
   τουτεστι τον ενιαυτον. Cf. Macrob. Sat. i. 17; Serv. on Æn. iv.
   377.]

Thus spoke Minerva, and she persuaded his mind for him, unthinking one.
Straightway he uncased his well-polished bow, made from [the horn of] a
wild, bounding goat, which he indeed surprising once on a time in
ambush, as it was coming out of a cavern, struck, aiming at it beneath
the breast; but it fell supine on the rock. Its horns had grown sixteen
palms from its head; and these the horn-polishing artist, having duly
prepared, fitted together, and when he had well smoothed all, added a
golden tip. And having bent the bow, he aptly lowered it, having
inclined it against the ground; but his excellent companions held their
shields before him, lest the martial sons of the Greeks should rise
against him, before warlike Menelaus, the chief of the Greeks, was
wounded. Then he drew off the cover of his quiver, and took out an
arrow, fresh, winged, a cause of gloomy ills. Forthwith he fitted the
bitter arrow to the string, and vowed to Lycian-born Apollo, the
renowned archer, that he would sacrifice a splendid hecatomb of
firstling lambs, having returned home to the city of sacred Zeleia.
Having seized them, he drew together the notch [of the arrow] and the
ox-hide string; the string, indeed, he brought near to his breast, and
the barb to the bow. But after he had bent the great bow into a circle,
the bow twanged, the bowstring rang loudly, and the sharp-pointed shaft
bounded forth, impatient to wing its flight through the host.

Nor did the blessed immortal gods forget thee, O Menelaus;[174] but
chiefly the spoil-hunting daughter of Jove, who, standing before thee,
averted the deadly weapon. She as much repelled it from thy body, as a
mother repels a fly from her infant, when it shall have laid itself down
in sweet sleep. But she herself guided it to that part where the golden
clasps of the girdle bound it, and the double-formed corslet met.[175]
The bitter arrow fell on his well-fitted belt, and through the
deftly-wrought belt was it driven, and it stuck in the variegated
corslet and the brazen-plated belt which he wore, the main defence of
his body, a guard against weapons, which protect him most; through even
this did it pass onwards, and the arrow grazed the surface of the hero's
skin, and straightway black gore flowed from the wound. And as when some
Mæonian[176] or Carian woman tinges ivory with purple colour, to be a
cheek-trapping for steeds; in her chamber it lies, and many charioteers
desire to bear it, but it lies by as an ornament for the king, both as a
decoration to the steed, and a glory to the rider: so, Menelaus, were
thy well-proportioned thighs, and legs, and fair feet below, stained
with gore.

   [Footnote 174: It is elegantly observed by Coleridge, p. 160,
   that "it is principally owing to our sense of the dramatic
   probability of the action of the divinities in the Iliad that the
   heroes do not seem dwarfed by their protectors; on the contrary,
   the manifest favourite of the gods stands out in a dilated and
   more awful shape before our imagination, and seems, by the
   association, to be lifted up into the demigod."]

   [Footnote 175: "Occurrebat sagittæ, obvius erat ei
   penetranti."--Heyne. But it is better to understand, "where the
   plates of the cuirass meet and overlay the ζωμα."--Arnold.]

   [Footnote 176: _I.e._ Lydian.]

Then Agamemnon, the king of men, shuddered, as he beheld the black gore
flowing from the wound, and Mars-beloved Menelaus himself shuddered. But
when he saw the string[177] and the barbs still outside, his courage was
once more collected in his breast. But Agamemnon, deeply sighing, and
holding Menelaus with his hand, spoke thus amidst them, and all his
companions kept groaning with him:

   [Footnote 177: With which the iron head was fastened to the
   shaft.]

"O dear brother, now have I ratified a treaty which will prove thy
death, exposing thee alone to fight with the Trojans for the Greeks;
since the Trojans have thus wounded thee, and trampled on the faithful
league. But by no means shall the league and the blood of the lambs be
in vain, and the pure libations, and the right hands in which we
confided. For even although Olympian Jove has not immediately brought
them to pass, he will however bring them to pass at last; and at a great
price have they paid the penalty,[178] to wit, with their own heads, and
their wives and children. For this I know well in mind and soul. A day
will be, when sacred Ilium shall perish, and Priam, and the people of
ashen-speared Priam; and when Saturnian Jove, lofty-throned, dwelling in
the æther, will himself shake his gloomy ægis over all, wrathful on
account of this treachery. These things, indeed, shall not be
unaccomplished; but to me there will be grief on thy account, O
Menelaus, if thou shalt die and fulfil the fate of life; then, indeed,
branded with shame, shall I return to much longed-for Argos. For quickly
the Greeks will bethink themselves of their fatherland, and we shall
leave Argive Helen a boast to Priam and to the Trojans, and the earth
will rot thy bones lying in Troy, near to an unfinished work. And thus
will some one of the haughty Trojans exclaim, leaping upon the tomb of
glorious Menelaus: 'Would that Agamemnon thus wreaked his vengeance
against all, as even now he has led hither an army of the Greeks in
vain, and has now returned home into his dear native land, with empty
ships, having left behind him brave Menelaus.' Thus will some one
hereafter say: then may the wide earth yawn for me."

   [Footnote 178: The past tense for the future: implying that the
   hour of retribution is so certain, that it may be considered
   already arrived.]

But him fair-haired Menelaus accosted, cheering him: "Have courage, nor
in anywise frighten the people of the Achæans. The sharp arrow has not
stuck in a vital part, but before [it reached a vital part], the
variegated belt, and the girdle beneath, and the plate which
brass-working men forged, warded it off."

King Agamemnon answering him replied: "Would that it were so, O beloved
Menelaus; but the physician shall probe the wound, and apply remedies,
which may ease thee of thy acute pains."

He spoke; and thus accosted Talthybius, the divine herald: "Talthybius,
summon hither with all speed the hero Machaon, son of the blameless
physician Æsculapius, that he may see martial Menelaus, the chief of the
Greeks, whom some skilful archer of the Trojans, or of the Lycians, has
wounded with a shaft; a glory, indeed, to him, but a grief to us."

He spoke; nor did the herald disobey when he had heard. But he proceeded
to go through the forces of the brazen-mailed Greeks, looking around for
the hero Machaon: him he saw standing, and round him the brave ranks of
the shield-bearing hosts, who followed him from steed-nourishing Tricca.
Standing near, he spoke winged words:

"Come, O son of Æsculapius, Agamemnon, king of men, calls thee, that
thou mayest see martial Menelaus, the son of Atreus, whom some skilful
archer of the Trojans or of the Lycians has wounded with a dart; a glory
indeed to him, but a grief to us."

Thus he spoke, and incited his soul within his breast. And they
proceeded to go through the host, through the wide army of the Greeks;
but when they had now arrived where fair-haired Menelaus had been
wounded (but around him were collected as many as were bravest, in a
circle, while the godlike hero stood in the midst), instantly thereupon
he extracted the arrow from the well-fitted belt. But while it was being
extracted, the sharp barbs were broken. Then he loosed the variegated
belt, and the girdle beneath, and the plated belt which brass-workers
had forged. But when he perceived the wound, where the bitter shaft had
fallen, having sucked out the blood, he skilfully sprinkled on it
soothing remedies,[179] which, benevolent Chiron had formerly given to
his father.

   [Footnote 179: Celsus, Pref. "Podalirius et Machaon, bello
   Trajano ducem Agamemnonem secuti, non mediocrem opem
   commilitonibus suis attulerunt. Quos tamen Homerus non in
   pestilentia neque in variis generibus morborum aliquid attulisse
   auxilii, sed vulneribus tantummodo ferro et medicamentis mederi
   solitos esse proposuit. Ex quo apparet, has partes medicinæ solas
   ab his esse tentatas, easque esse vetustissimas."]

Whilst they were thus occupied around warlike Menelaus, meantime the
ranks of the shielded Trojans advanced; and these again put on their
arms, and were mindful of battle. Then would you not see divine
Agamemnon slumbering, nor trembling nor refusing to fight; but hastening
quickly to the glorious fight. He left his steeds, indeed, and his
brass-variegated chariot; and these his servant Eurymedon, son of
Ptolymæus, the son of Piräis, held apart panting. Him he strictly
enjoined to keep them near him, against the time when weariness should
seize his limbs, commanding over many. But he on foot traversed the
ranks of the heroes, and whichever of the swift-horsed Greeks he saw
hastening, them standing beside, he encouraged with words:

"Argives! remit nought of your fierce ardour, for father Jove will not
be an abettor to falsehoods, but certainly vultures will devour the
tender bodies of those very persons, who first offered injury, contrary
to the league; and we, after we shall have taken the city, will carry
off in our ships their dear wives, and their infant children."

But whomsoever on the other hand he saw declining hateful battle, them
he much rebuked with angry words:

"Argives, ye arrow-fighters,[180] subjects for disgrace, are ye not
ashamed? Why stand ye here astounded, like fawns, which, when they are
wearied, running through the extensive plain, stand, and have no
strength in their hearts? Thus do ye stand amazed, nor fight. Do ye
await the Trojans until they come near, where your fair-prowed galleys
are moored on the shore of the hoary sea, that ye may know whether the
son of Saturn will stretch forth his hand over you."

   [Footnote 180: If it be remembered that archery, in comparison
   with fighting close-handed, handed, was much despised (cf. Soph.
   Aj. 1120, sqq.; Eur. Herc. Fur. 160), the term ἰόμωροι (οἱ περὶ
   τοὺς ἰοὺς μεμορημένοι, Apoll. Lex. and Hesych.) need not be
   forced into any of the out-of-the-way meanings which Anthon and
   others have assigned to it.]

Thus he, acting as commander, kept going through the ranks of heroes,
and he came to the Cretans, going through the throng of men. But they
were armed around warlike Idomeneus. Idomeneus, on his part, [commanded]
in the van, like a boar in strength; but Meriones urged on the hindmost
phalanxes for him. Seeing these, Agamemnon, the king of men, rejoiced,
and instantly accosted Idomeneus, in bland words:

"O Idomeneus, I honour thee, indeed, above the swift-horsed Greeks, as
well in war, as in any other work, and at the banquet, when the nobles
of the Argives mix in their cups the dark-red honourable[181] wine: for
though the other crested Greeks drink by certain measures, thy cup
always stands full, as [mine] to me, that thou mayest drink when thy
mind desires it. But hasten into war, such as formerly thou didst boast
to be."

   [Footnote 181: See my note on Od.]

But him Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, in turn answered: "Son of
Atreus, a very congenial ally will I be to thee, as first I promised and
assented. But exhort the other crested Greeks that we may fight with all
haste, since the Trojans have confounded the league: death and griefs
shall be theirs hereafter, since they first offered injury, contrary to
the league."

Thus he spoke: and the son of Atreus passed on, joyous at heart, and he
came to the Ajaces, going through the troops of the heroes. But they
were armed, and with them followed a cloud of infantry. As when a
goat-herd from a hill-top perceives a cloud traversing the deep, beneath
the north-western blast; and to him, standing at a distance, it appears
while coming over the ocean, darker than pitch, and brings with it a
mighty whirlwind;[182] he both shudders on seeing it, and drives his
flock into a cave. Such, with the Ajaces, moved into hostile battle the
dense dark phalanxes of Jove-nurtured youths, bristling with shields and
spears. And king Agamemnon seeing them, rejoiced, and accosting them,
spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 182: The _waterspout_, which is often followed by
   hurricanes, is meant. See Arnold.]

"Ye Ajaces, leaders of the brazen-mailed Argives, ye two, indeed, for it
becomes me not, I in no respect desire to incite; for ye yourselves
mightily instigate the people to fight valiantly. Would that, O father
Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, such courage were in the breasts of all; soon
then would the city of king Priam bend to its fall, taken and destroyed
by our hands."

Thus having said, he left them there and went to the others; there he
found Nestor, the harmonious orator of the Pylians, marshalling his
associates, and exhorting them to battle, mighty Pelagon, Alastor,
Chromius, and prince Hæmon, and Bias the shepherd of the people. In
front, indeed, he placed the cavalry[183] with their horses and
chariots, but the foot, both numerous and brave, in the rear, to be the
stay of the battle; but the cowards he drove into the middle, that
every man, even unwilling, might fight from necessity. At first, indeed,
he gave orders to the horsemen; these he commanded to rein in their
horses, nor to be confused with the crowd. "And let no person, relying
on his skill in horsemanship, and on his strength, desire alone, before
the rest, to fight with the Trojans, nor let him retreat: for [if so],
ye will be weaker. And whatever man, from his own chariot, can reach
that of another, let him stretch out with his spear;[184] for so it is
much better: for thus the ancients overturned cities and walls, keeping
this purpose and resolution in their breasts."

   [Footnote 183: _I. e._ those who fought from chariots.]

   [Footnote 184: With Arnold and Anthon, I follow Köppen's
   interpretation. The meaning is, whoever, without leaping from his
   own chariot, can reach that of another, should commence the
   attack. This was less dangerous than dismounting.]

Thus the old man, long since well skilled in wars, exhorted them, and
king Agamemnon rejoiced when he saw him; and accosting him, spoke winged
words:

"O old man, would that thy knees could so follow thee, and thy strength
were firm as is the courage in thy breast. But old age, common alike to
all, wearies thee. Would that some other man had thy age, and that thou
wert amongst the more youthful."

Him then the Gerenian knight Nestor answered: "Son of Atreus, I myself
would much wish to be so, as when I killed Eruthalion. But the gods
never give all things at the same time to men. If I were a young man
then, now in turn old age invades me. Yet even so, I will be with the
horse, and will exhort them with counsel and words: for this is the
office of old men. But let the youths, who are younger than I am, and
confide in their strength, brandish their spears."

Thus he spoke; and the son of Atreus passed him by, rejoicing at heart.
Next he found the horseman Menestheus, son of Peteus, standing, and
around him the Athenians skilled in the war-shout: but crafty Ulysses
stood near; and round him stood the ranks of the Cephallenians not
feeble; for not yet had the troops of these heard the shout, since
lately the roused phalanxes of the horse-subduing Trojans and of the
Greeks moved along; but they stood waiting till another division of the
Greeks, coming on, should charge the Trojans and begin the battle.
Having seen these, therefore, Agamemnon, the king of men, reproved them,
and, accosting them, spoke winged words:

"O son of Peteus, Jove-nurtured king, and thou, accomplished in evil
wiles, crafty-minded [Ulysses], why trembling do ye refrain from battle,
and wait for others? It became you, indeed, being amongst the first, to
stand and meet the ardent battle. For ye are the first invited by me to
the feast when we Greeks prepare a banquet for the chiefs. Then it is
pleasant to you to eat the roasted meats, and to quaff cups of sweet
wine, as long as ye please. But now would ye in preference be
spectators, though ten divisions of the Greeks should fight in your
presence with the ruthless brass."

But him sternly regarding, crafty Ulysses answered thus: "Son of Atreus,
what a word has escaped the barrier of thy teeth! How canst thou say
that we are remiss in fighting? Whenever we Greeks stir up fierce
conflict against the horse-taming Trojans, thou shalt see, if thou
desirest, and if these things are a care to thee, the beloved father of
Telemachus mingled with the foremost of the horse-taming Trojans. But
thou sayest these things rashly."

But him king Agamemnon, when he perceived that he was angry, smiling,
addressed, and he retracted his words:

"Noble son of Laertes, much-contriving Ulysses, I neither chide thee in
terms above measure, nor exhort thee. For I am aware that thy mind in
thy breast kens friendly counsels: for thou thinkest the same that I do.
But come, we shall settle these disputes at a future time, should
anything evil have now been uttered. But may the gods render all these
things vain."

Thus having spoken, he left them there, and went to others; he found
magnanimous Diomede, son of Tydeus, standing by his horses and
brass-mounted[185] chariot. Near him stood Sthenelus, son of Capaneus.
And having seen him too, king Agamemnon reproved him, and accosting him
thus, spoke winged words:

"Alas! O son of warlike horse-breaking Tydeus, why dost thou tremble?
Why dost thou explore the intervals of the ranks?[186] It was not with
Tydeus thus customary to tremble, but to fight with the enemy far before
his dear companions. So they have said, who beheld him toiling: for I
never met, nor have I beheld him: but they say that he excelled all
others. For certainly with godlike Polynices he entered Mycenæ without
warlike array, a guest, collecting forces: they[187] were then preparing
an expedition against the sacred walls of Thebes, and supplicated much
that they would give renowned auxiliaries. But they [the Mycenæans] were
willing to give them, and approved of it, as they urged; but Jove
changed [their design], showing unpropitious omens. But, after they
departed, and proceeded on their way, they came to rushy, grassy Asopus.
Then the Achæans sent Tydeus upon an embassy.[188] Accordingly he went,
and found many Cadmeans feasting in the palace of brave Eteocles. Then
the knight Tydeus, though being a stranger, feared not, being alone
amongst many Cadmeans: but challenged them to contend [in games], and
easily conquered in all, so mighty a second was Minerva to him. But the
Cadmeans, goaders of steeds, being enraged, leading fifty youths, laid a
crafty ambuscade for him returning: but there were two leaders, Mæon,
son of Hæmon, like unto the immortals, and Lycophontes, persevering in
fight, the son of Autophonus. Tydeus, however, brought cruel death upon
them. He killed them all, but sent one only to return home: for he
dismissed Mæon, obeying the portents of the gods. Such was Ætolian
Tydeus. But he begat a son, inferior to himself in battle, but superior
in council."

   [Footnote 185: Properly, "fastened, soldered."]

   [Footnote 186: Lit. "the bridges of the war." He was looking to
   see where there was a chance of escape by running between the
   ranks.]

   [Footnote 187: Polynices and Adrastus. The reader will do well to
   compare Grote vol. i. p. 371.]

   [Footnote 188: To Thebes.]

Thus he spoke; but brave Diomede answered nothing, reverencing the
rebuke of the venerable king.

But him the son of renowned Capaneus answered: "Son of Atreus, lie not,
knowing how to tell truth. We, indeed, boast to be far better than our
fathers. We too have taken the citadel of seven-gated Thebes, leading
fewer troops under the wall sacred to Mars, confiding in the portents of
the gods, and in the aid of Jove: but they perished through their own
infatuation. Wherefore, never place my ancestors in the same rank with
me."

Him sternly regarding, brave Diomede accosted thus: "My friend[189]
Sthenelus, sit in silence, and obey my words; for I blame not Agamemnon,
the shepherd of the people, for thus exhorting the well-greaved Greeks
to fight. Glory shall attend him, if, indeed, the Greeks shall conquer
the Trojans, and take sacred Ilium; but great grief shall be his, on the
other hand, the Greeks being cut off. But come now, and let us be
mindful of impetuous valour."

   [Footnote 189: Τέττα is an affectionate phrase applied to an
   elder, like _papa_. Compare Alberti on Hesych. v. ἀπφία, t. i. p.
   505, and on ἅττα, p. 606; Helladius, Chrestom. p. 9, ed. Meurs.]

He spoke, and from his chariot leaped with his arms upon the earth, and
dreadfully sounded the brass on the breast of the prince, as he moved
rapidly along: then truly would fear have seized even a brave spirit.

As when on the loud-resounding shore a wave of the sea is impelled in
continuous succession beneath the north-west wind which has set it in
motion; at first indeed it raises itself aloft in the deep, but then
dashed against the land, it roars mightily; and being swollen it rises
high around the projecting points, and spits from it the foam of the
sea: thus then the thick phalanxes of the Greeks moved incessantly on to
battle. Each leader commanded his own troops. The rest went in silence
(nor would you have said that so numerous an army followed, having the
power of speech in their breasts), silently reverencing their leaders.
And around them all their arms of various workmanship shone brightly;
clad with which, they proceeded in order. But the Trojans, as the sheep
of a rich man stand countless in the fold, whilst they are milked of
their white milk, continually bleating, having heard the voice of their
lambs--thus was the clamour of the Trojans excited through the wide
army. For there was not the same shout of all, nor the same voice, but
their language was mixed, for the men were called from many climes.
These Mars urged on, but those blue-eyed Minerva,[190] and Terror, and
Rout, and Strife, insatiably raging, the sister and attendant of
homicide Mars, she raises her head, small indeed at first, but
afterwards she has fixed her head in heaven, and stalks along the earth.
Then also she, going through the crowd, increasing the groaning of the
men, cast into the midst upon them contention alike destruction to all.

   [Footnote 190:

    "On th' other side, Satan alarm'd
    Collecting all his might dilated stood,
    Like Teneriff or Atlas unremoved:
    His stature reach'd the sky."--Paradise Lost, iv. 985.]

But they, when now meeting, they had reached the same place, at once
joined their ox-hide shields, and their spears, and the might of
brazen-mailed warriors; and the bossy shields met one another, and much
battle-din arose. There at the same time were heard both the groans and
shouts of men slaying and being slain; and the earth flowed with blood.
As when wintry torrents flowing down from the mountains, mix in a basin
the impetuous water from their great springs in a hollow ravine, and the
shepherd in the mountains hears the distant roar--so arose the shouting
and panic of them, mixed together.

Antilochus first killed a Trojan warrior, Echepolus, son of Thalysias,
valiant in the van. Him he first struck on the cone of his horse-plumed
helmet, and the brazen point fixed itself in his forehead, then pierced
the bone, and darkness veiled his eyes; and he fell, like a tower, in
fierce conflict. Him fallen, king Elephenor, the offspring of Chalcodon,
chief of the magnanimous Abantes, seized by the feet, and was drawing
him beyond the reach of darts in haste, that with all haste he might
despoil him of his armour: but that attempt was short; for magnanimous
Agenor having descried him dragging the body, wounded him with a brazen
spear in the side, which, as he stooped, appeared from beneath the
covert of his shield, and he relaxed his limbs [in death]. His soul
therefore left him. But over him arose a fierce conflict of Trojans and
of Greeks. But they like wolves rushed on each other, and man bore down
man. Then Telamonian Ajax smote the blooming youth Simoïsius, son of
Anthemion, whom formerly his mother, descending from Ida, brought forth
on the banks of Simois, when, to wit, she followed her parents to view
the flocks; wherefore they called him Simoïsius. Nor did he repay to his
dear parents the price of his early nurture, for his life was short, he
being slain with a spear by magnanimous Ajax. For him advancing first,
he [Ajax] struck on the breast, near the right pap: and the brazen
spear passed out through his shoulder on the opposite side. He fell on
the ground in the dust, like a poplar, winch has sprung up in the moist
grass-land of an extensive marsh,--branches grow smooth, yet upon the
very top, which the chariot-maker lops with the shining steel, that he
might bend [it as] a felloe for a beauteous chariot. Drying, it lies
indeed on the banks of the river. So did the high-born Ajax spoil
Simoïsius, the descendant of Anthemion. But at him Antiphus, of the
varied corslet, the son of Priam, took aim through the crowd with a
sharp spear. From whom, indeed, it erred: but he struck Leucus, the
faithful companion of Ulysses, in the groin, as he was drawing the body
aside; but he fell near it, and the body dropped from his hand. For him
slain, Ulysses was much enraged in mind; and he rushed through the van,
armed in shining brass; and advancing very near, he stood, and casting
his eyes all around him, hurled with his glittering spear. But the
Trojans retired in confusion, as the hero hurled; he did not, however,
hurl the spear in vain, but struck Democoon, the spurious son of Priam,
who came from Abydos, from [tending] the swift mares.[191] Him Ulysses,
enraged for his companion, struck with his spear in the temple, and the
brazen point penetrated through the other temple, and darkness veiled
his eyes. Falling he made a crash, and his arms resounded upon him. Both
the foremost bands and illustrious Hector fell back. The Argives shouted
aloud, and dragged the bodies away: then they rushed farther forward;
and Apollo was enraged, looking down from Pergamus; and, shouting out,
exhorted the Trojans:

   [Footnote 191: Priam had a stud at Abydos, on the Asiatic coast
   of the Hellespont.--Scholiast.]

"Arouse ye, ye horse-breaking Trojans, nor yield the battle to the
Greeks; since their flesh is not of stone, nor of iron, that when they
are struck, it should withstand the flesh-rending brass; neither does
Achilles, the son of fair-haired Thetis, fight, but at the ships he
nourishes his vexatious spleen."

Thus spoke the dreadful god from the city. But most glorious Tritonian
Pallas, the daughter of Jove, going through the host, roused the Greeks
wherever she saw them relaxing.

Then fate ensnared Diores, son of Amarynceus; for he was struck with a
jagged hand-stone, at the ankle, on the right leg; but Pirus, son of
Imbrasus, who came from Ænos, the leader of the Thracian warriors,
struck him. The reckless stone entirely crushed both tendons and bones;
supine in the dust he fell, stretching forth both hands to his dear
companions, and breathing forth his soul. But Pirus, he who struck him,
ran up, and pierced him in the navel with his spear; and thereupon all
his entrails poured forth upon the ground, and darkness veiled his eyes.

But him[192] Ætolian Thoas struck, rushing on with his spear, in the
breast over the pap, and the brass was fastened in his lungs: Thoas came
near to him, and drew the mighty spear out of his breast; then he
unsheathed his sharp sword, and with it smote him in the midst of the
belly, and took away his life. But he did not spoil him of his armour,
for his companions stood round him, the hair-tufted Thracians, holding
long spears in their hands, who drove him from them, though being
mighty, and valiant, and glorious; but he, retreating, was repulsed with
force. Thus these two were stretched in the dust near to each other;
Pirus, indeed, the leader of the Thracians, and Diores, the leader of
the brazen-mailed Epeans; and many others also were slain around.

Then no longer could any man, having come into the field, find fault
with the action, who, even as yet neither wounded from distant
blows,[193] nor pierced close at hand with the sharp brass, might be
busied in the midst, and whom spear-brandishing Minerva might lead,
taking him by the hand, and might avert from him the violence of the
darts; for many of the Trojans and of the Greeks on that day were
stretched prone in the dust beside one another.

   [Footnote 192: Pirus.]

   [Footnote 193: Observe the distinction between ἄϑλητος and
   ἀκούτατος. Sec Anthon; Ammonius, p. 29; Valck. Βεϑλῆσθαι μεν ἐστι
   τὸ ἐκ βολης ετρὼσθαί, καἰ ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων οὐτᾶσθαι δὲ, τὸ ἐκ
   χειρὸς τετρῶσθαι.]




                            BOOK THE FIFTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

The exploits of Diomedes, who, irritated by a wound from Pandarus,
fights with unremitted fury, and even wounds Venus and Mars, who were
aiding the Trojans.


Then, moreover, Pallas Minerva gave strength and daring to Diomede, the
son of Tydeus, that he might become conspicuous amongst all the Argives,
and might bear off for himself excellent renown. And she kindled from
his helmet and his shield an unwearied fire, like unto the summer[194]
star, which shines[195] very brightly, having been bathed in the ocean.
Such a fire she kindled from his head and shoulders, and she urged him
into the midst, where the greatest numbers were in commotion.

   [Footnote 194: _I. e._ the dog star, Sirius, whose rising marked
   the beginning of the ὀπώρα, or season extending from the middle
   of July to the middle of September. It is said to be most
   brilliant at its time of rising. Cf. Apoll. iii. 956: Ὅς δή τοι
   καλὸς μὲν ἀρίζηλός τ' ἐσιδέσθαί Ἀντέλλει.]

   [Footnote 195: This use of the subjunctive mood is called the
   σχῆμα Ἰϑύκειον by Lesbonax, p. 179, ed. Valck.]

Now there was amongst the Trojans one Dares, rich, blameless, the priest
of Vulcan; and he had two sons, Phegeus and Idæus, well skilled in all
kinds of battle: these twain, apart [from their companions], rushed to
meet [Diomede]; they on their part, from their two-horse chariot, but
he, from the ground, made the attack on foot. When these, therefore,
advancing against each other, were now near, Phegeus first hurled forth
his long-shadowed spear, and the point of the spear went over the left
shoulder of the son of Tydeus, nor did it strike him. But the son of
Tydeus next rushed on with his brazen javelin; nor did the weapon fly in
vain from his hand, but struck his [Phegeus's] breast between the paps,
and forced him from his chariot. Then Idæus leaped down, having left the
very beautiful chariot, nor ventured to protect his slain brother. [In
vain,] for not even he would have escaped gloomy fate, but Vulcan
snatched him away, and saved him, having enveloped him in darkness, that
the old man might not be altogether sad. But the son of magnanimous
Tydeus having taken the horses, gave them to his companions to lead to
the hollow ships. When the magnanimous Trojans beheld the sons of Dares,
the one[196] flying, the other slain at the chariot, the hearts of all
were discomfited. But azure-eyed Minerva, seizing him by the hand, thus
addressed impetuous Mars: "Mars, Mars, man-slayer, gore-stained, stormer
of walls, should we not suffer the Trojans and the Greeks to fight, to
which side soever father Jove may give glory; but let us retire, and
avoid the wrath of Jove?"

Thus having said, she led impetuous Mars from the battle, and afterwards
seated him on grassy[197] Scamander. Then the Greeks turned the Trojans
to flight, and each of the leaders slew his man. First Agamemnon, king
of men, hurled from his chariot huge Hodius, chief of the Halizonians.
For in the back of him first turned [in flight], between his shoulders
he fixed the spear, and drove it through his breast; and falling, he
made a crash, and his arms resounded upon him.

But next Idomeneus killed Phæstus, the son of Mæonian Borus, who had
come from fertile Tarne. Him, just as he was mounting his chariot,[198]
spear-famed Idomeneus, with his long lance, wounded in the right
shoulder: he fell from his chariot, and hateful darkness seized him.
Then the attendants of Idomeneus despoiled him of his arms.

   [Footnote 196: observe the construction by apposition, soph. ant.
   21: τὼ κασιγνήτω, τὸν μὲν προτίσας, τὸν δ' ἀτιμάσας ἔχει.--561:
   τὼ παῖδε φημὶ τώδε τὴν μὲν ἀρτίως ἄνουν πεϕάνθαι, τὴν δ' ἀϕ' οὗ
   τὰ πρῶτ' ἔϕυ.]

   [Footnote 197: see buttm. lexil. p. 324, sqq.]

   [Footnote 198: i shall generally adopt this translation of ϊπποι,
   with anthon.]

Menelaus, the son of Atreus, slew with his sharp[199] spear Scamandrius,
son of Strophius, clever in the chase, an excellent huntsman; for Diana
herself taught him to shoot all kinds of beasts, which the wood in the
mountains nurtures. But then at least arrow-rejoicing Diana availed him
not, nor his skill in distant shooting, in which he had been formerly
instructed. But spear-renowned Menelaus, son of Atreus, wounded him,
flying before him, with a spear in the back, between the shoulders, and
drove [the spear] through his breast. Prone he fell, and his arms
resounded upon him.

Meriones slew Phereclus, son of the artist Harmon, who knew how to form
with his hands all ingenious things (for Pallas Minerva loved him
exceedingly): who also for Alexander had built the equal ships, source
of woes, which were a bane to all the Trojans and to himself, since he
did not understand the oracles of the gods.[200] Meriones, indeed, when
following he overtook him, struck him in the right hip; but the point
went right through beneath the bone, near the bladder; and on his knees
he fell lamenting, and death overshadowed him.

   [Footnote 199: Apoll. Lex. Hom. p. 604, ed. Villois: ὀξυόεντι. Ὸ
   μὲν Ἀπίων, όξεῖ ἔγχει, ὀξυόεντι δὲ, ὀξυΐνῳ. With Anthon, I prefer
   Apion's interpretation. Others explain it "beechen," or
   "thorn-wood." Cf. Alberti on Hesych. p. 766.]

   [Footnote 200: A doubtful line, but probably referring to an
   oracle by which the Trojans were recommended to avoid maritime
   affairs. Cf. Procl. Chrestom. p. 472, ed. Gaisf.]

But Meges next slew Pedæus, son of Antenor, who, indeed, was a spurious
son, yet noble Theano brought him up with care, equally with her own
dear children, gratifying her husband. Him the spear-famed son of
Phyleus, on his part, coming near, smote on the back of the head with
his sharp spear; the steel cut through his teeth under his tongue. In
the dust he fell, and caught the cold steel in his teeth.

But Eurypylus, son of Evæmon, slew noble Hypsenor, son of magnanimous
Dolopion, who was priest of Scamander, and was honoured as a god by the
people; him, as he was flying before him, Eurypylus, then, the
illustrious son of Evæmon, struck in the shoulder in his flight, rushing
on with his sword, and cut off his heavy hand: then the gory hand fell
in the field; but blood-red death and stern fate seized his eyes.

Thus they on their part laboured in the violent fight. But you would not
have known the son of Tydeus, to which side he belonged, whether he was
mixed with the Trojans or with the Greeks. For he rushed through the
plain, like unto a river swollen by mountain-streams, which flowing
rapidly throws down bridges: and this, neither the fortified dams can
restrain, nor the fences of the richly-blooming fields check, as it
comes suddenly, when the rain-storm of Jove bears down heavily: many
hopeful works of vigorous youths are wont to fall by it. Thus by the son
of Tydeus were the close phalanxes of the Trojans thrown into confusion;
nor did they withstand him, although being numerous.

When, therefore, Pandarus, the illustrious son of Lycaon, saw him
rushing through the field, discomfiting the phalanxes before him, he
drew his crooked bow, and smote him rushing on, striking him upon the
right shoulder [on] the cavity of the corslet: the bitter shaft flew on
and broke through to the other side; and the corslet was stained with
blood. Whereupon the illustrious son of Lycaon exclaimed aloud:

"Rush on, ye magnanimous Trojans, spurrers of steeds, for the bravest
of the Greeks is wounded; nor do I think that he will long endure the
violent arrow, if king Apollo, the son of Jove, really urged me
proceeding from Lycia."

Thus he spoke, vaunting; but him [Diomede] the swift arrow did not
subdue: but having retreated, he stood before his horses and chariot,
and thus accosted Sthenelus, son of Capaneus:

"Haste, dear son of Capaneus, descend from thy chariot, that thou mayest
draw from my shoulder the bitter shaft."

Thus he spoke, and Sthenelus leaped from his chariot to the ground, and,
standing by him, drew the swift, deeply-piercing arrow forth from his
shoulder, and the blood spurted out through the twisted mail. Then
Diomede, brave in battle, prayed:

"Hear me, O daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unwearied, if ever favouring
thou stoodest by me and my sire in the hostile fight, now in turn
befriend me, O Minerva. And grant me to slay this man, and that he may
approach within the aim of my spear, who being beforehand has struck me,
and boasts, and says that I shall not long behold the brilliant light of
the sun."

Thus he spoke, praying, and Pallas Minerva heard him, and made light his
limbs, his feet, and his hands above, and standing near him, spoke
winged words:

"With confidence, now, O Diomede, fight against the Trojans; for into
thy soul have I sent that intrepid ancestral might, such as the
shield-brandishing knight Tydeus was wont to possess: and moreover I
have taken away the darkness from thine eyes, which before was upon
them, that thou mayest discern a god and also a man. Wherefore now, if
any divinity come hither, making trial of thee, do thou by no means
fight against any other immortal gods; but if Venus, daughter of Jove,
should come into battle, wound her at all events with the sharp brass."

Thus on her part having spoken, azure-eyed Minerva departed: but the son
of Tydeus, returning again, was mixed with the van; and ardent as he
before was in spirit to fight against the Trojans, then, indeed, thrice
as much courage possessed him. Like as a lion, whom the shepherd in the
country, by his fleecy sheep, has grazed indeed, while overleaping the
court-yard, but has not killed; he [the shepherd] has merely roused his
ardour; but afterwards he ventures no farther aid, but on the contrary
retires within the fold, while the sheep, deserted, fly in
consternation. These, indeed, are huddled in masses one upon another,
but he [the lion] leaps joyfully from the lofty fold.[201] So was brave
Diomede joyfully mixed with the Trojans.

Then he slew Astynoüs, and Hypenor the shepherd of the people: having
smote the one above the pap with the brazen lance, but the other he
smote with his huge sword on the collar-bone at the shoulder, and
separated the shoulder from the neck and back. These, indeed, he left,
but rushed on Abas and Polyïdus, the sons of Eurydamas, the aged
interpreter of dreams; to whom going to the war, the old man did not
interpret their dreams; but brave Diomede spoiled them when slain. Then
he went against Xanthus and Thoon, the sons of Phænops, both dearly
cherished;[202] but he was worn by sad old age, and did not beget
another son to leave over his possessions. These, then, Diomede slew,
and took their life from both, but to their father left grief and
mournful cares, since he did not receive them returning alive from
battle; but his next of kin[203] divided the inheritance amongst them.

   [Footnote 201: A very doubtful line.]

   [Footnote 202: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 511.]

   [Footnote 203: Schol.: Χηρωσταὶ, οὶ τὸν χῆρον οῖκον διανεμόμενοι
   κληρονόμοι. Apoll. Lex. p. 854: Οὶ μακρόθεν προσήκοντες κατὰ
   γένος, καὶ χῆρα ὄντα τῶν σύνεγγυς τὰ χρήματα κληρονομοῦντες.]

Then he seized Echemon and Chromius, two sons of Dardanian Priam, being
in one chariot. As when a lion, leaping amidst the herd, has broken the
neck of a heifer or of an ox pasturing in a thicket; so did the son of
Tydeus forcibly dislodge them both from the chariot against their wills,
and then spoiled them of their arms. But the steeds he gave to his
companions, to drive to the ships.

But him Æneas beheld devastating the ranks of men, and he hastened to go
both through the battle and the din o spears, seeking godlike Pandarus,
if anywhere he might find him. He found the blameless and valiant son of
Lycaon, and stood before him, and spoke [this] word to him:

"O Pandarus, where are thy bow and thy winged shafts, and thy renown,
with which no man here at least contends with thee, nor does any person
in Lycia boast to be braver than thou? But come, having raised thy hands
to Jove, aim an arrow against this man, (whoever he be, who is thus
prevailing, and who has already wrought many ills against the Trojans,
since he has relaxed the knees of many and of brave), unless he be some
god, wrathful against the Trojans, angry on account of sacrifices [not
offered]: and unless the severe wrath of a deity be upon us."

Him the illustrious son of Lycaon answered in turn: "Æneas, counsellor
of the brazen-mailed Trojans, I assimilate him in all respects to the
warlike son of Tydeus, recognizing him by his shield and oblong helmet,
and looking on his steeds: but I do not know certainly whether he be a
god. But if this man, whom I speak of, be the warlike son of Tydeus, he
does not perform these frantic deeds without divine aid, but some one of
the immortals stands near, wrapped round as to his shoulders[204] in a
cloud, who has turned into another course the swift shaft just about to
hit him. For but just now I aimed an arrow at him, and struck him on the
right shoulder, entirely through the cavity of his corslet; and I
thought I should hurl him down to Pluto; yet did I not altogether subdue
him; some god, of a truth, is wrathful. And steeds and chariots are not
present, which I might ascend: but somewhere in the palaces of Lycaon
[are] eleven chariots, beautiful, newly-built, lately made: coverings
are spread around them: and beside each of them stand steeds yoked in
pairs, eating white barley and wheat. Of a truth the aged warrior Lycaon
gave me, on setting out, very many commands in his well-built palaces:
he ordered me, having ascended my steeds and my chariot, to command the
Trojans in the fierce conflicts; but I heeded him not (and truly it
would have been much better), sparing my steeds, lest they, accustomed
to feed largely, should want food, to my cost[205], the men being shut
up [in the city]. Thus I left them; but I have come on foot to Troy,
relying on my bow and arrows, but these were not destined to profit me.
For lately I aimed [a shaft] at two chiefs, at the son of Tydeus and the
son of Atreus; and having struck, I drew blood manifestly from both; but
I roused them the more. Therefore, with evil fate I took down my curved
bow from the peg, on that day when I led the Trojans to pleasant Ilium,
doing a favour to divine Hector. But if I shall return, and shall with
these eyes behold my country, and my wife, and my lofty-roofed great
palace, immediately may some hostile man cut off my head, if I do not
put this bow into the shining fire, having broken it with my hands; for
it attends on me to no purpose."

   [Footnote 204: Cf. Hor. Od. i. 2, 31: "Nube candentes humeros
   amictus."]

   [Footnote 205: Observe the force of μοι.]

Him then Æneas, the leader of the Trojans, addressed in turn: "Speak not
so: but it will not be otherwise, before that we twain, with horses and
chariot, going against this man, make trial of him with arms. But come,
ascend my chariot; that thou mayest see of what kind are the steeds of
Tros, skilful in the plain to pursue rapidly here and there, and to
retreat; they also shall bring us safe again to the city, if Jove will a
second time afford glory to Diomede, the son of Tydeus. But come, take
the whip now, and the shining reins, and I will descend from the
chariot, that I may fight; or do thou await this man, and the steeds
shall be my care."

Him then the illustrious son of Lycaon answered in turn: "Æneas, do thou
thyself hold the reins and thy own steeds: the better will they bear
along the curved chariot under their accustomed charioteer, if we shall
fly back from the son of Tydeus; lest they, taking fright, should become
restive, and be unwilling to bear us away from the war, missing thy
voice, and the son of magnanimous Tydeus, rushing on us, should slay
ourselves, and drive away thy solid-hoofed steeds. But do thou thyself
drive the chariot and thy own steeds, but with my sharp spear will I
receive him advancing."

Thus having said, ascending the variegated chariot, they directed the
swift steeds impetuously against the son of Tydeus. But Sthenelus, the
illustrious son of Capaneus, perceived them, and immediately to the son
of Tydeus he spoke winged words:

"Diomede, son of Tydeus, most dear to my soul, I perceive two valiant
men eager to fight against thee, possessing immense might; one, indeed,
well-skilled in the bow,[206] Pandarus, and moreover he boasts to be the
son of Lycaon, and Æneas, [who] boasts to be born the son of magnanimous
Anchises; but Venus is his mother. But come, let us now retire, having
ascended our horses, nor thus, I pray thee, run furiously through the
van, lest thou shouldst lose thy dear life."

But him sternly regarding, brave Diomede thus addressed: "Talk not to me
of retreat,[207] since I think thou wilt not persuade me. It becomes not
my nature to fight in a skulking manner, nor to tremble; as yet my
strength is unimpaired. I am averse to mount the chariot, but even as I
am will I advance to meet them: spear-brandishing Minerva does not
suffer me to tremble. Never shall the swift horses bear these twain both
back again from us, supposing even one of them shall escape. But another
thing I tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thy soul, if most prudent
Minerva should grant me the glory to kill both, then do thou detain here
these swift steeds, stretching forth the reins from the rim, and,
mindful, rush upon the horses of Æneas, and drive them from the Trojans
to the well-greaved Greeks. For they are of that breed which far-seeing
Jove gave as a price to Tros for his son Ganymede; wherefore they are
the best of steeds, as many as are under the east and the sun. From this
breed Anchises, king of men, stole them, having supplied mares without
the knowledge of Laomedon: of the breed of these six were foaled in his
courts. Reserving four himself, he nourished them at the manger, and
two, skilled in rousing terror, he gave to Æneas. If we can take these,
we shall have borne away excellent glory."

   [Footnote 206: This bold change of construction, where one would
   have expected τὸν μὲν, τὸν, δὲ, has been noticed by Lesbonax, p.
   186.]

   [Footnote 207: But Anthon, I think, with more spirit, renders
   this, "Speak not at all fearward."]

Thus they were speaking such things to each other; but the others soon
drew near, urging onward their swift steeds. The illustrious son of
Lycaon first accosted Diomede:

"Stout-hearted, warlike-minded, son of illustrious Tydeus, certainly my
swift shaft, my bitter arrow has not slain thee. Now again will I try
with my spear, whether I can hit my mark." [208]

He said, and brandishing [it], he sent forth his long-shadowed spear,
and struck the shield of Tydides: but the brazen spear flying straight
through, approached the corslet. Then the son of Lycaon shouted loudly
over him:

"Thou art wounded in the flank, through and through, nor do I think thou
wilt endure it much longer: but to me hast thou given great glory."

But him the valiant son of Tydeus, undisturbed, addressed: "Thou hast
erred, nor hast thou reached thine aim;[209] but I certainly think thou
wilt not cease, till one of you at least, having fallen, shall satiate
Mars, the warrior of the bull's-hide shield, with his blood."

   [Footnote 208: This is the best manner of expressing the full
   meaning of τύχωμι.]

   [Footnote 209: _I. e._ given a mortal wound.]

Thus having spoken, he hurled forth [his lance], and Minerva directed
the weapon to his nose, near the eye; and it passed quite through his
white teeth: and then unwearied, the brass cut the root of his tongue,
and the point came out at the bottom of his chin. From his chariot he
fell, and his variegated, shining [210] arms resounded upon him; but his
swift-footed steeds started aside through fright, and there were his
soul and strength dissolved. Æneas then bounded down with his shield and
long spear, fearing lest the Greeks by any means should take the body
away from him. He walked round it, therefore, like a lion, confiding in
his strength: and before him he stretched out his lance, and his shield
equal on all sides, shouting dreadfully, eager to slay him, whoever
might come against him. But the son of Tydeus seized in his grasp a
hand-stone, a huge affair, such as no two men could carry, such at least
as mortals are now; but he even alone easily wielded it. With it he
struck Æneas on the hip, where the thigh is turned in the hip;--they
call it the socket;--the socket he smote violently, and broke besides
both tendons, and the rugged stone tore off the skin. But the hero
having fallen on his knees, remained so, and supported himself with his
strong hand upon the ground, and dark night veiled his eyes.

   [Footnote 210: But Buttm. Lexil. p. 65 prefers "agile," _i. e._
   easily-wielded.]

And there, of a truth, Æneas, the king of men, had perished, unless
Venus, the daughter of Jove, had quickly perceived him, his mother, who
brought him forth to Anchises as he fed his oxen;[211] but around her
own dear son she spread her white arms, and before him she extended the
folds of her shining robe, as a fence against arrows, lest any of the
swift-horsed Greeks having cast the steel into his breast, should take
away his life. She, indeed, stealthily bore off her beloved son from the
battle. Nor was the son of Capaneus forgetful of those commands which
warlike Diomede gave him: but he detained his own solid-hoofed steeds
apart from the tumult, having stretched forth the reins from the rim;
and rushing forward, drove from the Trojans to the well-greaved Greeks
the beautiful-maned steeds of Æneas, and gave them to Deipylus, his
beloved companion (whom he honoured above all his coevals, because he
possessed in his mind sentiments congenial with himself), to drive them
to the hollow ships: but the hero himself, having ascended his chariot,
took the splendid reins; and instantly drove his solid-hoofed steeds
after the son of Tydeus with ardour; but Diomede pursued Venus with the
cruel steel,[212] knowing that she was an unwarlike goddess, nor [one]
of those goddesses who administer the war of men, neither Minerva, nor
city-destroying Bellona. But when he had now overtaken her, having
pursued her through a great crowd, then the son of magnanimous Tydeus,
having stretched forward, wounded the feeble [goddess] in the extremity
of the hand, bounding on with the sharp brass. Instantly the spear
pierced through the skin, through her ambrosial robe (which the Graces
themselves had wrought), at the extremity [of the hand] above the palm.
Immortal blood flowed from the goddess, ichor, such, to wit, as flows
from the blessed gods. For they eat not bread, nor drink dark wine;
therefore are they bloodless, and are called immortal. But she screaming
aloud, cast her son from her: and him Phoebus Apollo rescued in his
hands in a sable cloud, lest any of the swift-horsed Greeks, casting the
steel into his breast, should take away his life. But warlike Diomede
shouted loudly after her:

   [Footnote 211: Cf. Theocrit. i. 105: Ού λέγεται τὰν Κύπριν ὸ
   βουκόλος, ἕρπε ποτ' Ἰδὰν, Ἔρπε ποτ' Ἀγχίσαν. See Hymn, in Vener.
   54, sqq.; and Grote, Hist. of Greece, vol. i. p. 73.]

   [Footnote 212: It is well known that these battles and woundings
   of the gods gave so much scandal to Plato, that he wished to cast
   Homer out of his republic, much to the indignation of Heraclides
   Ponticus, Alleg. Hom. p. 511. The fathers of the early church
   made no small use of Plato's opinion on this head. Cf. Euseb. P.
   E. ii. 10; Tertull. Apol. § xiv.; Augustin, C. D. ii. 14;
   Minucius Felix, 22; who all make use of his testimony as an
   argument against Paganism. See Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 64.]

"Withdraw, O daughter of Jove, from war and battle. Is it not sufficient
that thou dost practise deception upon feeble women? But if thou wilt go
to the war, I certainly think thou wilt hereafter dread battle, even
though thou but hearest of it elsewhere."

Thus he spoke: but she departed, distracted [with pain], for she was
grievously exhausted. But swift-footed Iris having taken her, led her
outside the crowd, oppressed with griefs; but she began to turn livid as
to her beauteous skin. Then she found impetuous Mars sitting at the left
of the battle; and his spear and swift horses had been enveloped in
darkness. But she, falling on her knees, with many entreaties besought
from her dear brother his golden-frontleted steeds:

"Dear brother, render me a service, and give me thy steeds, that I may
go to Olympus, where is the seat of the immortals. I am grievously
oppressed with a wound which a mortal man, the son of Tydeus, inflicted
on me, who now would fight even with father Jove."

Thus she spoke: but Mars gave her the golden-frontleted steeds. But she
mounted the chariot, grieving in her heart; and Iris mounted beside her,
and took the reins in her hands, and scourged them to go on, and they
flew not unwillingly. And immediately then they reached the seat of the
gods, the lofty Olympus. There nimble, swift-footed Iris stayed the
steeds, having loosed them from the chariot, and set before them
ambrosial fodder. But the goddess Venus fell at the knees of her mother
Dione; and she embraced her daughter in her arms, and soothed her with
her hand, and addressed her, and said:

"Which of the heavenly gods, beloved daughter, has wantonly done such
things to thee, as if thou hadst openly wrought some evil?"

But her laughter-loving Venus answered: "The son of Tydeus, haughty
Diomede, has wounded me, because I was withdrawing from battle my
beloved son Æneas, who is by far most dear to me of all. For it is no
longer the destructive contest of Trojans and of Greeks; but now the
Greeks fight even with the immortals."

But her Dione, divine one of goddesses, answered: "Endure, my daughter,
and bear up, although grieved; for many of us, possessing Olympian
habitations, have in times past endured pains at the hand of men,[213]
imposing heavy griefs on one another. Mars, in the first place, endured
it, when Otus and valiant Ephialtes, the sons of Aloëus, bound him in a
strong chain. He was chained in a brazen prison for thirteen months: and
perhaps Mars, insatiate of war, had perished there, had not his
stepmother, all-fair Eëribæa, told it to Mercury; but he stole Mars
away, already exhausted, for the cruel chain subdued him. Juno also
suffered, when the brave son of Amphitryon smote her in the right
breast with a three-pronged shaft. Then most irremediable pain seized
her. Amongst these Pluto also endured a swift shaft, when the same hero,
the son of ægis-bearing Jove, afflicted him with pains at Pylos amongst
the dead, having wounded him. But he went to the palace of Jove, and the
lofty Olympus, grieving in his heart, and transfixed with pains; for the
shaft had pierced into his huge shoulder, and tortured his soul. But
Pæon healed him, sprinkling pain-assuaging remedies, for he was not at
all mortal. Audacious, regardless one! who felt no compunction in doing
lawless deeds,--who with his bow violated the gods that dwell in
Olympus. But against thee azure-eyed goddess Minerva has excited this
man. Infatuate! nor does the son of Tydeus know this in his mind, that
he is by no means long-lived who fights with the immortals, nor ever at
his knees will sons lisp a father's name, as he returns from war and
dreadful battle. Therefore, let the son of Tydeus now, though he be very
brave, have a care, lest a better than thou fight with him: lest at a
future time Ægialëa, the very prudent daughter of Adrastus, the noble
spouse of horse-taming Diomede, grieving, should rouse her servants from
sleep, longing for the husband of her youth, the bravest of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 213: Speaking of these humiliations of the gods, Grote,
   Hist. t. i. p. 78, well observes: "The god who serves is for a
   time degraded; but the supreme god who commands the servitude is
   in the like proportion exalted, whilst the idea of some sort of
   order and government among these super-human beings was never
   lost sight of."]

She spoke, and with her palms wiped off the ichor from her hand: the
hand was healed, and the severe pains mitigated. But then Minerva and
Juno looking on, provoked Saturnian Jove with heart-cutting words; but
amidst them azure-eyed goddess Minerva thus began speaking:

"Father Jove, wilt thou indeed be angry with me on account of what I
shall say? Surely it must be that Venus, inspiring some one of the
Grecian women with a desire of accompanying the Trojans, whom now she
exceedingly loves, while caressing one of those fair-robed Grecian
women, has torn her delicate hand against a golden buckle."

Thus she spoke: but the father of men and gods smiled, and having
called, he thus accosted golden Venus:

"Not to thee, daughter mine, are intrusted warlike works; but do thou
confine thyself to the desirable offices of marriage, and all these
things shall be a care to swift Mars and to Minerva."

Thus they, indeed, were speaking such things to each other. But Diomede,
doughty in the din of battle, rushed upon Æneas, conscious that Apollo
himself held over him his hands. But he revered not the mighty god, for
he always longed to slay Æneas, and despoil him of his glorious armour.
Thrice then, immediately, he rushed on, eager to slay him, and thrice
Apollo repelled his shield with violence; but when at length the fourth
time he rushed on, like a god, the far-darting Apollo menacing terribly,
addressed him: "Consider, O son of Tydeus, and retire, nor wish to think
things equal with the gods; for the race of the immortal gods and of men
walking on the earth is in nowise similar."

Thus he spoke: but the son of Tydeus retired a little, biding the wrath
of far-darting Apollo. But Apollo placed Æneas apart from the crowd, in
sacred Pergamus, where his temple was.[214] Latona and shaft-rejoicing
Diana healed him in the mighty shrine, and adorned him with glory. But
silver-bowed Apollo formed a phantom like unto Æneas himself and such in
arms. Around the phantom the Trojans and the noble Greeks smote on each
others' breasts the well-battered ox-hide shields, and the light
bucklers. Then at length Phœbus Apollo addressed impetuous Mars:

   [Footnote 214: "On the Trojan citadel of Pergamus itself was a
   temple of Apollo, Diana and Latona; and hence Homer represents
   these three deities protecting the falling city."--Μüller,
   Dorians, vol. i. p. 248.]

"Mars! Mars! man-slaughterer, gore-tainted, wall-batterer! wouldst not
thou now, meeting this man, the son of Venus, withdraw him from the
battle, who would even now cope with father Jove? First, indeed, in
close combat, he wounded Venus in the hand, at the wrist; but then he
assailed me, like unto a god."

Thus having spoken, he sat down on lofty Pergamus; but destructive Mars
aroused the ranks of the Trojans, going through them, assimilating
himself to Acamus, the swift leader of the Thracians, and thus he
harangued the Jove-nourished sons of Priam:

"Ye sons of Priam, Jove-nourished king, how long will ye suffer the
people to be slain by the Greeks? Is it until they fight around the
well-made gates? A hero lies prostate, whom we honoured equally with
noble Hector, the son of magnanimous Anchises. But come, let us rescue
from the assault our excellent companion."

Thus having spoken, he excited the might and courage of heart. Then
Sarpedon much rebuked noble Hector:

Hector, where now has that strength gone, which thou didst formerly
possess? Thou saidst, I ween, that thou, with thy kindred and thy
brothers, couldst defend the city without the forces and allies. Now I
can neither see nor perceive any of these; but they crouch down, like
dogs but a lion: we, on the contrary, who are here mere allies, bear the
brunt of the fight. Even I, being thine ally, have come from a very
great distance; for far off is Lycia, at lying Xanthus, where I left my
beloved wife and my infant son, and many possessions, which he who is
poor covets: but I, nevertheless, exhort the Lycians, and ready myself
to fight with that hero; and yet there is here to me such store as the
Greeks can carry or let. But thou standest still, and dost not exhort
even the forces to stand and to defend their wives. Beware perchance,
as though ensnared in the meshes of an a turing net, thou become a prey
and a spoil to hostile for quickly will they destroy thy well-inhabited
city. As it behoves thee, both night and day, to interest thyself in
these matters, beseeching the chiefs of thy far-summoned force to
persevere with ardour, and forego their violent strife.

Thus spoke Sarpedon, but his speech gnawed the heart of Hector, and
immediately he leaped from his chariot with his armour to the ground,
and brandishing his sharp spear, went in all directions through the
army, exhorting the battle; and he stirred up a grievous conflict. The
Trojans rallied and stood against the Greeks; but the Greeks stood in
close array, withstood them, nor fled.

And as the wind scatters the chaff about the threshing-floors, when men
are winnowing [it], and yellow Ceres is separating both the grain and
the chaff, the winds rush along; and the chaff-heaps[215] grow white
beneath; thus then the Greeks became white with the chaff from above,
which indeed through them, as they again mingled in the combat, the feet
of the steeds struck up [the ground] to the brazen heaven; for the
charioteers turning back. But they directed the strength of theirs
straight forward; and fierce Mars spread a vapour over the battle,
aiding the Trojans, going about everywhere, echoing the commands of
golden-sworded Phœbus Apollo and ordered him to excite the courage of
the Trojans, whenever he should see Pallas Minerva departing; for she
was an ally of the Greeks. But he sent forth Æneas from his very rich
shrine and infused strength into the breast of the shepherd of the
people.

   [Footnote 215: But cf. Schol. οἱ τόποι εἰς οὓς τὰ ἄχυρα
   ἐκπίπτει.]

Then Æneas placed himself amidst his companions and they rejoiced when
they saw him approaching alive, unhurt and having excellent strength.
They did not ever, ask any questions; for a different labour did not
pale which the silver-bowed god and man-slaughtering war and Strife
insatiably raging, had excited. But then Greeks, the two Ajaces, and
Ulysses and Diomede, urged on to fight. But they, even by themselves,
feared neither the violent attacks[216] of the Trojans, nor their
shouts: but remained firm, like unto clouds, which the son of Saturn,
during a calm, has placed upon the lofty mountains, at rest, when the
might of Boreas sleeps,[217] and of the other impetuous winds, which,
blowing with shrill blasts, disperse the shadowy clouds. Thus the Greeks
awaited the Trojans, standing firm, nor fled. But the son of Atreus kept
hurrying through the host, exhorting them much:

"O friends, be men, and assume a valiant heart, and feel shame[218]
towards each other through the fierce engagements: for more of those men
who dread shame are safe, than are slain; but from fugitives neither
does any glory arise, nor any assistance."

He spoke, and darted with his spear quickly, and struck Dëicoon, son of
Pergasis, a warrior chief, the companion of magnanimous Æneas, whom the
Trojans honoured equally with the sons of Priam; since he was prompt to
fight amidst the van. Him then king Agamemnon struck in the shield with
his spear, but it [the shield] did not repel the spear, for even through
this it passed onwards, and pierced him through the belt, at the lower
part of the stomach. And he made a crash as he fell, and his arms
rattled over him.

Here then Æneas slew some brave heroes of the Greeks,--Crethon and
Orsilochus, the sons of Diocles: their father, indeed, rich in
sustinence,[219] dwelt in well-built Pheræ; but his origin was from the
river Alpheus, which flows widely through the land of the Pylians.
Alpheus begat Orsilochus, a prince over many men; but Orsilochus begat
magnanimous Diocles; and of Diocles were born two sons, Crethon and
Orsilochus, well skilled in all kinds of battle. These, indeed, in the
bloom of youth, in their sable ships followed with the Argives to Ilium
famed for noble steeds, seeking honour for the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon
and Menelaus: but there the end of death overshadowed them.

   [Footnote 216: Such seems to be the force of the plural βίας.]

   [Footnote 217: "Ascending, while the north wind sleeps."--Milton,
   P. L. ii. 489.]

   [Footnote 218: I. e. be ashamed to fly or give way. Compare
   Plato, Sympos. p. 317, F. G. ed. Læm., where he dwells upon the
   advantages of friends fighting together, as rendering men ashamed
   of any cowardly action.]

   [Footnote 219: This construction with the genitive is very common
   in Latin. Virg. Georg. ii. 468: "dives opum." Æn. i. 18; Hor. Ep.
   ii. 2, 31; Od. iv. 8, 5; Silius, i. 393.]

They two,[220] just as two lions have been reared under their dam, amid
the thickets of a deep wood, on a mountain's heights; they in process of
time seizing oxen and fat sheep, lay waste the stalls of men, till at
length they are themselves killed by the hands of men with the sharp
brass; such these two, subdued by the hands of Æneas, fell like lofty
firs. Then Menelaus, brave in the din of war, pitied them fallen, and
went through the van, equipped in shining brass, brandishing his spear;
for Mars kindled his strength, with the design that he should be subdued
by the hands of Æneas.

But him Antilochus, son of magnanimous Nestor, beheld, and proceeded
through the van, for he feared much for the shepherd of the people, lest
he should suffer anything, and greatly disappoint them of [the fruits
of] their labour. And now they were stretching forth their hands and
sharp spears against each other, eager to fight; but Antilochus stood
very near the shepherd[221] of the people. But Æneas, though a brisk
warrior, remained not, when he beheld the two heroes standing near each
other. When, therefore, they had drawn the dead bodies[222] to the
people of the Greeks, they gave the miserable pair into the hands of
their companions; and they themselves, returning back, fought in the
van.

   [Footnote 220: The order is, τώγε, οἴω λέοντε δύω. Anthon refers
   to Kühner 1. 443, 4, p. 97, Jelf's Translation.]

   [Footnote 221: See note on ver. 50.]

   [Footnote 222: Of the sons of Diocles.]

Then they slew Pylæmenes, equal to Mars, general of the magnanimous
shielded Paphlagonians. Him indeed the son of Atreus, spear-renowned
Menelaus, wounded with a spear as he stood, having smote him on the
collar-bone. But Antilochus on his part smote the charioteer Mydon, his
brave attendant, the son of Atymnias (now he was in the act of turning
his solid-hoofed steeds), having struck him with a hand-stone on the
elbow; immediately the reins, white with ivory, fell from his hands on
the ground in the dust. But Antilochus, rushing on, smote him with his
sword in the temple, and panting he fell from the well-made chariot,
headlong in the dust, on his head and his shoulders. Very long he stood
(for he fell on deep sand), till the two horses, striking him, cast him
to the ground in the dust: but Antilochus lashed them on, and drove them
to the army of the Greeks.

But them Hector discerned through the ranks, and rushed on them,
vociferating, and with him followed the brave phalanxes of the Trojans.
Mars and venerable Bellona led them; she, on the one hand, bearing with
her tumultuous Din, but Mars, on the other, brandished a huge spear in
his hands. At one time, indeed, he paced before Hector, at another after
him.

But him Diomede, brave in fight, seeing, trembled. As when a man,
uncertain of his course, passing over a great plain, has stopped at a
swift-flowing river, running into the sea, beholding it boiling with
foam, and retreats back in haste: so then did the son of Tydeus retire,
and he said to the host:

"O friends, how do we all admire noble Hector, that he is both a
spearman and a daring warrior! But with him one at least of the gods is
ever present, who wards off death; even now Mars in person stands by him
like unto a mortal man. But retreat back, [with your faces] turned
always to the Trojans, nor desire to fight valiantly against the gods."

Thus then he said: but the Trojans advanced very near them. There Hector
slew two heroes skilled in battle, Menesthes and Anchialus, being in one
chariot. But mighty Telamonian Ajax pitied them falling; and advancing
he stood very near them, and launched with his shining spear, and smote
Amphius, son of Selagus, who, exceedingly rich in property and crops,
dwelt in Pæsus. But fate had led him as an ally to Priam and his sons.
Him Telamonian Ajax smote on the belt, and the long-shadowed spear was
fixed in the pit of his stomach. Falling, he made a crash, and
illustrious Ajax ran up to him, about to spoil [him of] his armour; but
the Trojans poured upon him sharp spears, shining all around, and his
shield received many. But he, pressing on him with his heel, drew from
the body his brazen spear; however, he was not able to take off from his
shoulders any other beautiful armour, for he was pressed upon with
weapons. He also dreaded the stout defence of haughty Trojans,[223] who,
both numerous and doughty, stood around, stretching forth their spears,
and who drove him away from them, although being mighty, and valiant,
and renowned. But he, retiring, was repelled by force.

   [Footnote 223: Cf. Lex. Seg. 6, p. 336. Bekk.: ἀγέρωχος, σεμνὸς,
   ὑπερόπτης, ϑρασύς. On the different and doubtful etymologies of
   this word, see Alberti on Hesych. t. i. p, 44, and Buttm. Lexil.
   p. 19, sq.]

Thus they, on the one hand, toiled through the violent conflict. But
violent fate urged on Tlepolemus, the brave and great son of Hercules,
against godlike Sarpedon. But when they, the son and grandson of
cloud-collecting Jove, were now rushing against one another, Tlepolemus
first addressed him [Sarpedon]:

"Sarpedon, chief of the Lycians, what necessity is there for thee, being
a man unskilled in war, to tremble here? Falsely do they say that thou
art the offspring of ægis-bearing Jove, since thou art far inferior to
those heroes, who were of Jove, in the time of ancient men. But what
sort do they say that Hercules was, my bold-minded, lion-hearted father?
who formerly coming hither, on account of the steeds of Laomedon, with
six ships only, and with a few men, laid waste the city of Ilium, and
widowed its streets. But thou hast an ignoble mind, and thy forces are
perishing away; nor do I think that thou wilt be an assistance to the
Trojans, having come from Lycia, not even if thou be exceedingly
valiant; but that, slain by me, thou wilt pass through the gates of
Hades."

But him Sarpedon, leader of the Lycians, in return accosted:
"Tlepolemus, he indeed overturned sacred Ilium, through the folly of the
hero, famous Laomedon, who reproved with harsh language him who had
deserved well, nor did he give back the steeds, on account of which he
came from afar. But I tell thee that here slaughter and gloomy death
will befall thee at my hands; and that, subdued by my spear, thou wilt
give glory to me, and a spirit to steed-famed[224] Pluto."

   [Footnote 224: An epithet probably derived from the steeds
   ("inferni raptoris equos," Claudian, de R. P. i. 1) employed in
   the abduction of Proserpine.]

Thus spoke Sarpedon: but Tlepolemus raised his ashen spear, and from
their hands, at the same moment, flew the long spears. Sarpedon, on his
part, struck the centre of [his adversary's] neck, and the grievous
weapon passed right through; and gloomy night overspread his eyes. But
Tlepolemus in the meantime had struck Sarpedon in the left thigh with
his long spear; and the spear, rushing with violence, passed through,
grazing the bone: but his father as yet averted death.

His noble companions bore godlike Sarpedon from the battle; but the long
spear, trailed along with him, pained him; but this no one of them
hastening noticed, nor thought of extracting from his thigh the ashen
spear, that he might ascend the chariot; for such anxiety did his
attendants entertain for him. But on the other side the well-greaved
Greeks carried Tlepolemus from the fight; and divine Ulysses, possessing
an enduring heart, perceived them, and his soul was stirred within him.
And then he anxiously pondered in his mind and soul, whether he should
pursue farther the son of loud-thundering Jove, or should take away the
lives of many more Lycians. But it was not fated for magnanimous Ulysses
to slay the brave son of Jove with the sharp spear. Therefore Minerva
turned his thoughts towards the multitude of the Lycians. Then he slew
Cœranus, and Alastor, and Chromius, and Alcander, and Halius, and
Noëmon, and Prytanis. And yet more Lycians would noble Ulysses have
slain, had not mighty crest-tossing Hector quickly perceived him. He
therefore went through the van, armed in shining brass, bearing terror
to the Greeks: then Sarpedon, the son of Jove, rejoiced at him
approaching, and spoke [this] mournful address:

"O son of Priam, I pray thee, suffer me not to lie a prey to the Greeks,
but aid me. Even then[225] let life forsake me in thy city; since I was
not destined to gladden my dear wife and infant son, returning home to
my dear fatherland."

   [Footnote 225: I. e. when you have rescued my body from the foe,
   I will die content in Troy.--Anthon.]

Thus he spoke: but him plume-waving Hector answered nought, but flew
past him, in order that he might repel the Greeks with all haste, and
take away the lives of many. His noble companions meantime placed
godlike Sarpedon under a very beautiful beech of ægis-bearing Jove.
Stout Pelagon then, who was his beloved companion, forced out the ashen
spear from his thigh. Thereupon animation left him, and darkness was
poured over his eyes; but he again revived, for the breeze of Boreas,
breathing upon him around, refreshed in spirit him panting with
difficulty.

But the Greeks, on account of Mars and brazen-helmed Hector, neither
were driven at any time back to their sable ships, nor did they advance
forward to battle; but always kept giving ground, since they had heard
that Mars was with the Trojans.

Then whom first, whom last did Hector, the son of Priam, and brazen Mars
slay? The godlike Teuthras, and moreover the knight Orestes, the Ætolian
spearman Trechus, and Œnomaus, and Helenus of the race of Œnops, and
Oresbius of flexible[226] belt, who dwelt in Hyla, near the lake
Cephissus, very intent on wealth: and near him dwelt other Bœotians,
having a very rich territory.

   [Footnote 226: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 66. I. e. "a belt which he
   could easily move, and which, from its suppleness and
   flexibility, yielded to the pressure of his person."--Anthon.]

When therefore the white-armed goddess Juno perceived these Greeks
perishing in the violent engagement, straightway to Minerva she
addressed winged words:

"Strange! O daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, unwearied one, certainly we
have made a vain promise to Menelaus, that he should return after having
destroyed well-walled Ilium, if we suffer destructive Mars thus to rage.
But come, let us too bethink ourselves of some powerful aid."

Thus she spoke; nor did the azure-eyed goddess Minerva disobey her.
Juno, on her part, venerable goddess, daughter of mighty Saturn, quickly
moving, harnessed her gold-caparisoned steeds; but Hebe speedily applied
to the chariot, to the iron axletree on both sides, the curved wheels,
golden, with eight spokes. Of these, indeed, the felloe is of gold,
imperishable: but above [are] brazen tires fastened on them, wonderful
to be seen; but the circular naves on both sides are of silver; and the
body[227] was stretched on with gold and silver thongs (there was a
double circular rim); from this projected a silver pole; at its
extremity she bound the golden, beauteous yoke, and to it attached the
beautiful golden poitrels. But Juno, longing for conquest and battle,
led the swift-footed steeds under the yoke.

   [Footnote 227: δίφρος is properly the seat, but is here put for
   the whole chariot.]

Minerva, on the other hand, the daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, let flow
down on her father's floor her dainty robe of variegated hue, which she
herself had wrought and worked with her own hands: then she, having put
on her tunic, equipped herself for the tearful war in the armour of
cloud-compelling Jove, and around her shoulders she then threw the
fringed ægis, dreadful, around which on all sides Terror appears plumed.
Thereon was Strife, thereon Fortitude, and thereon was chilling
Pursuit;[228] on it was the Gorgonian head of the dreadful monster,
dire, horrible, a portent of ægis-bearing Jove. On her head she placed
her four-crested helmet, with a spreading metal ridge,[229] golden,
sufficient for the heavy-armed of a hundred cities. She then stepped
into her shining chariot with her feet; and took her spear, heavy, huge,
and sturdy, with which she, sprung from a dread sire, subdues the ranks
of heroic men, with whomsoever she is wroth. But Juno with the lash
quickly urged on the steeds. The gates of heaven creaked spontaneously,
the gates which the Hours guarded, to whom are intrusted the mighty
heaven and Olympus, as well to open the dense cloud as to close it. In
this way, indeed, through these gates, they drove their steeds, urged on
with the goad: and they found the son of Saturn sitting apart from the
other gods on the highest summit of many-peaked Olympus. There staying
her steeds, the white-armed goddess Juno interrogated supreme Saturnian
Jove, and thus addressed him:

"O father Jove, art thou not indignant at Mars for these bold
deeds,--how numerous and how choice a multitude of Greeks he has
destroyed rashly, nor as became him: a grief indeed to me; but Venus and
silver-bowed Apollo in quiet are delighted, having let slip this frantic
[god], who knows no rights. Father Jove, wilt thou be angry with me if I
drive Mars from the battle, having dreadfully wounded him?"

   [Footnote 228: Compare Προίωξις and Παλίωξις, similarly
   personified, in Hesiod, Scut. Herc. 134, and Virg. Æn. viii. 701:

              "--tristesque ex æthere Diræ,
              Et scissâ gaudens vadit Discordia pallâ;
              Quam cum sanguineo sequitur Bellona flagello."]

   [Footnote 229: See note on iii. 362.]

But her answering, cloud-compelling Jove addressed:

"Come, incite the pillaging Minerva against him, who is very wont to
cause him to approach grievous woes."

Thus he spoke: nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey, but she
lashed on her steeds. They flew, not unwillingly, midway between the
earth and the starry heaven. Now, as much haze[230] as a man sees with
his eyes, sitting upon some lofty point, and looking over the darkling
ocean, so far do the high-sounding steeds of the gods clear at one
bound. But when they now reached Troy, and the two flowing rivers, where
Simois and Scamander unite their streams, there the white-armed goddess
Juno stayed her steeds, having loosed them from the chariot, and shed a
dense mist around them. But to them Simois afforded ambrosial food to
feed on.

But they went on, like unto timid doves in their pace, hastening to
assist the Grecian heroes. But when they had now arrived where the most
numerous[231] and the bravest stood collected in dense array round
horse-breaking Diomede, like raw-devouring lions or wild boars, whose
strength is not feeble, there standing, the white-armed goddess Juno
shouted aloud, having likened herself to great-hearted, brazen-voiced
Stentor, who was accustomed to shout as loud as fifty other men:

   [Footnote 230: Opposed to the pure air of æther. See Buttm.
   Lexil. p. 37, sqq.]

   [Footnote 231: Observe the elegant position of the plural verb
   between two singular substantives, according to the Schema
   Alemanicum. Compare Od. K, 513, and Il. Y, 138, which have been
   pointed out by Lesbonax, p. 179, ed. Valck.]

"Shame! ye Greeks! foul subjects of disgrace! admirable in form [alone].
As long, indeed, as divine Achilles was wont to be engaged in the war,
the Trojans were not in the habit of advancing beyond the Dardan gates;
for they dreaded his mighty spear; but now they fight at the hollow
ships, far away from the city."

Thus saying, she aroused the strength and courage of each. The
azure-eyed goddess Minerva rushed towards the son of Tydeus; but she
found that prince by his steeds and chariot, cooling the wound which
Pandarus had inflicted on him with a shaft. For perspiration had
afflicted him beneath the broad belt of his well-orbed shield: with this
was he afflicted, and he was fatigued as to his hand; and raising the
belt, he wiped away the black gore. Then the goddess touched the yoke of
the horses, and said:

"Little like himself has Tydeus begotten a son. Tydeus was certainly
small in body, but a warrior. And even when I suffered him not to fight,
nor to rush furiously to battle, when he came far from the Greeks, an
ambassador to Thebes to the numerous Cadmeans, I commanded him to feast
quietly in the palaces; but he, retaining his doughty spirit, as before,
challenged the youths, the Cadmeans, and easily conquered them in
everything; so great an auxiliary was I to him. But thee, indeed, I
stand by and preserve, and I exhort thee freely to fight against the
Trojans. But either weariness, from great toil, has entered thy limbs,
or at least disheartening fear in some manner possesses thee. Thou art
not henceforth to be deemed at least the son of Tydeus, the gallant son
of Æneus."

But her valiant Diomede answering addressed: "I know thee, O goddess,
daughter of ægis-bearing Jove; therefore will I willingly tell this word
to thee, nor will I conceal it. Neither does any disheartening fear
possess me, nor any sloth: but as yet I am mindful of thy mandates,
which thou didst enjoin. Thou didst not suffer me to fight with the
other happy gods; but if Venus, the daughter of Jove, should come into
the battle, to wound her at least with the sharp steel. Wherefore now I
myself retire, and have ordered all the other Greeks to be collected
here: for I perceive Mars dispensing the battle."

But him the azure-eyed goddess Minerva then answered: "Diomede, son of
Tydeus, most dear to my soul, neither fear this Mars at all, nor any
other of the immortals; such an auxiliary am I to thee. But come, first
direct thy solid-hoofed steeds against Mars, strike him in close combat,
nor regard impetuous Mars, this frenzied and unnatural pest, shifter
from one to another; who lately haranguing promised me and Juno, that he
would fight against the Trojans, and aid the Greeks; but now he mixes
with the Trojans, and has forgotten these."

Thus having said, she forced Sthenelus from his horses to the ground,
dragging him back with her hand; but he promptly leaped down. Then the
goddess herself, infuriate, ascended the chariot beside noble Diomede,
and greatly did the beechen axle groan under the weight; for it bore a
dreadful goddess and a very brave hero. Then Pallas Minerva seized the
scourge and the reins. Straightway she drove the solid-hoofed steeds
against Mars first. He, indeed, had just slain huge Periphas, the
illustrious son of Ochesius, by far the bravest of the Ætolians. Him
indeed gore-stained Mars slew; but Minerva put on the helmet of Pluto
that impetuous Mars might not see her.

But when man-slaughtering Mars saw noble Diomede, he suffered huge
Periphas to lie there, where first slaying him he had taken away his
life, but he went straight against horse breaking Diomede. And when
these came near, advancing against each other, Mars first, over the yoke
and the reins of the steeds, stretched himself forward with his brazen
spear, eager to take away his life. It then the azure-eyed goddess
Minerva having caught in her hand, turned from the chariot, so as to be
borne away in vain. But next Diomede, valiant in the din of war, made
the attack with his brazen spear; and Pallas Minerva firmly fastened it
in his lowest flank, where he was girt with his belt. In that very part
striking, she wounded him, and tore his beautiful skin, and drew out the
spear again. Then roared brazen Mars, as loud as nine or ten thousand
men roar in war, joining the strife of battle. And then fear seized the
terrified Greeks and Trojans, so loud bellowed Mars, insatiate of war.

And as when from the clouds, a gloomy haze appears, a heavy-blowing wind
arising from heat; such did brazen Mars appear to Diomede, son of
Tydeus, going amid the clouds into the broad heaven. Quickly he reached
lofty Olympus, the seat of the gods, and sat near Saturnian Jove,
grieving in his heart, and showed the immortal blood flowing down from
the wound, and complaining, he spoke winged words:

"Father Jove, art thou not incensed beholding these violent deeds? Ever,
of a truth, are we deities suffering most grievous woes from the
machinations of each other, and [whilst] conferring favour upon men. We
all are indignant with thee;[232] for thou hast begotten a mad,
pernicious daughter, to whom evil works are ever a care. For all the
other gods, as many as are in Olympus, obey thee, and unto thee each of
us is subject. But her thou restrainest not by words, nor by any act,
but dost indulge her, since thou thyself didst beget this destructive
daughter. Who now has urged on Diomede, the overbearing son of Tydeus,
to rage against the immortal gods. Venus he first wounded, in close
fight, in the hand at the wrist; and, equal to a god, he afterwards
rushed on myself; but my swift feet withdrew me; [otherwise] I should
certainly for a long time have endured woes there amidst the dreadful
heaps of slain, or living should have been exhausted by the strokes of
the brass."

   [Footnote 232: Or, "through thee we are all at variance," taking
   σοί as put for διά σέ with Lesbonax, πεοί σχημ. p. 186;
   Hesychius, t. ii. p. 1234, and the Scholiast.]

Him sternly regarding, cloud-compelling Jove addressed: "Complain not to
me, inconstant one, sitting by me: for thou art most hateful to me, of
all the gods that possess Olympus: for to thee discord is ever grateful,
and wars and battles: thou hast thy mother Juno's insufferable and
unbending disposition, which I myself can scarcely repress with words.
Wherefore I think thou sufferest these things by her instigation. Yet no
longer can I endure thy suffering pain, for thou art my offspring, and
to me thy mother brought thee forth. But hadst thou, destructive as thou
art, been born of any other of the gods, even long since hadst thou been
far lower than the sons of Uranus."

Thus he spoke, and ordered Pæon to heal him: and Pæon healed him,
spreading [on his wound] pain-assuaging medicines; for he was not by any
means mortal. As when fig-tree juice,[233] on being stirred about,
curdles the white milk, fluid before, and it very rapidly coagulates,
while one is mixing it; thus at that time did he speedily heal impetuous
Mars. Hebe then washed him, and put on him beautiful garments. Then,
exulting in glory, near Saturnian Jove he sat down.

And now again Argive Juno and the powerful assistant Minerva returned to
the palace of mighty Jove, after having stayed man-slaying Mars from his
deeds of slaughter.

   [Footnote 233: Used as rennet.]




                            BOOK THE SIXTH.

                               ARGUMENT.


The gods having left the field, victory now inclines to the side of the
Greeks, and Helenus counsels Hector to order a public supplication to
Minerva in the citadel. While Hector is gone to the city for that
purpose, Diomedes and Glaucus recognize the friendship which had
formerly existed between their fathers, and exchange armour in token of
amity. Hecuba and the Trojan matrons present a robe to Minerva, and
offer up prayers for their country. Hector reproves Paris, and brings
him back to the field, having first taken an affecting farewell of his
wife and child.


And now the dreadful battle of the Trojans and the Greeks was abandoned.
Often here and there the battle raged through the plain, [the
combatants] directing against each other their brass-tipped spears,
between the rivers of Simois and Xanthus.

First Telamonian Ajax, the bulwark of the Greeks, broke through the
phalanx of the Trojans, and gave light[234] to his companions, smiting
the good and mighty hero Acamas, son of Eyssorus, who was the bravest
amongst the Thracians. First he struck him on the ridge of the
horse-haired helmet; and the brazen spear fixed itself in his forehead,
and passed on within the bone; but darkness veiled his eyes.

   [Footnote 234: _I. e._ the light of hope. Cf. Virg. Æn. ii, 281:
   "O _lux_ Dardaniæ, _spes_ ô fidissima Teucrûm." Quintus Calab.
   iii. 561. Έπεὶ σύ μοι ὶερoν ᾗμαρ, καὶ ϕάος ὴελίοιο πέλες.]

But Diomede, brave in the din of war, slew Axylus, the son of Teuthras,
who dwelt in well-built Arisba, rich in wealth, and he was beloved by
men, for dwelling in a house near the public way, he was wont to afford
entertainment to all. But none of them [his guests] coming up before
him, warded off sad death; but [Diomede] deprived both of life, himself
and his attendant Calesius, who then was the charioteer of his steeds,
and both these entered the earth.

And Euryalus slew Dresus and Opheltius; and afterwards went against
Æsepus and Pedasus, whom formerly the Naiad nymph Abarbarea brought
forth to blameless Bucolion. Bucolion was the son of illustrious
Laomedon, eldest by birth, but him his mother brought forth secretly.
While [Bucolion] was a shepherd, he was mingled in love and nuptials
with her amongst the sheep; but she becoming pregnant, brought forth
twin sons. And truly the son of Mecisteus[235] relaxed their strength
and their illustrious limbs, and tore the armour from their shoulders.
And next warlike Polypœtes slew Astyalus. Ulysses killed Percosian
Pidytes with his brazen spear; and Agamemnon, king of men, slew Elatus.
He dwelt at lofty Pedasus, on the banks of fair-flowing Satniois. The
hero Leïtus slew Phylacus flying; and Eurypylus killed and spoiled
Melanthius.

   [Footnote 235: Euryalus.]

In the next place Menelaus, valiant in the din of war, took Adrastus
alive; for his two steeds, flying bewildered over the plain, coming in
violent contact with a branch of tamarisk, and having broken the curved
chariot at the extremity of the pole, themselves flew towards the city,
whither others also fled terrified. But he was rolled from his chariot
near the wheel, prone in the dust on his mouth: but near him stood
Menelaus, the son of Atreus, holding his long-shadowed spear. Adrastus
then embracing his knees supplicated him:

"Take me alive, O son of Atreus, and receive a worthy ransom; in my
wealthy father's [house][236] lie abundant stores, brass and gold, and
well-wrought steel; out of which my sire will bestow on thee countless
ransom-gifts, if he shall hear that I am alive at the ships of the
Greeks."

Thus he spoke; and persuaded his mind in his breast, and already he was
on the point of consigning him to the care of his attendant to conduct
him to the ships of the Greeks: but Agamemnon running up, met him, and
shouting in a chiding tone, spoke:

"O soft one, O Menelaus, why art thou thus so much concerned for these
men? In sooth very kind offices were done to thee in thy family by the
Trojans.[237] Of whom let none escape utter destruction, and our hands;
not even him whom the mother carries, being an infant in her womb, let
not even him escape; but let all the inhabitants of Ilium perish
totally, without burial-rites, and obscure."

   [Footnote 236: Supply οϊκῳ or δόμω.]

   [Footnote 237: Ironically spoken.]

Thus having said, the hero changed his brother's mind, having advised
right things: but he, with his hand, thrust back the hero Adrastus from
him; and him king Agamemnon smote in the belly, and he was cast supine.
But the son of Atreus planting his heel upon his breast, drew out the
ashen spear.

Then Nestor exhorted the Greeks, exclaiming aloud: "O friends, Grecian
heroes, servants of Mars, let no one now, desirous of spoil, linger
behind, that he may return bringing abundance to the ships; but let us
slay the men, and afterwards at your leisure, shall ye spoil the dead
bodies through the plain."

Thus having said, he aroused the might and courage of each. And then
truly had the Trojans retreated into Ilium, under the influence of the
Mars-beloved Greeks, conquered through their own cowardice, had not
Helenus, son of Priam, by far the best of augurs, standing near, spoken
these words to Æneas and to Hector:

"Æneas and Hector, since upon you chiefly of the Trojans and Lydians the
labour devolves, because ye are the bravest for every purpose, both to
fight and to take counsel, stand here, and stay the forces before the
gates, running in all directions, before that, on the contrary, flying
they fall into the arms of their wives, and become a triumph to the
enemies. But after ye have exhorted all the phalanxes, we remaining here
will fight against the Greeks, though much pressed, for necessity urges
us. But Hector, do thou go to the city, and then speak to thy mother
and mine; and let her, collecting together the matrons of
distinction[238] into the temple of azure-eyed Minerva, on the lofty
citadel, [and] having opened the doors of the sacred house with the key,
let her place on the knees of fair-haired Minerva the robe which seems
to her the most beautiful, and the largest in her palace, and which is
much the most dear to her. And let her promise to sacrifice to that
goddess in her temple twelve yearling heifers, as yet ungoaded, if she
will take compassion on the city and on the wives and infant children of
the Trojans: if indeed she will avert from sacred Ilium the son of
Tydeus, that ferocious warrior, the dire contriver of flight: whom I
declare to be the bravest of the Greeks; nor have we ever to such a
degree dreaded Achilles, chiefest of men, whom they say is from a
goddess: but this man rages excessively, nor can any equal him in
might."

   [Footnote 238: Hesych. Γεραιάς ἐντίμους γυναὶκας, τὰς γέρας τι
   ἐχούσας.]

Thus he said, but Hector was by no means disobedient to his brother; and
instantly from his chariot he leaped to the ground with his arms, and
brandishing his sharp spears, he went in all directions through the
army, inciting them to fight: and he stirred up dreadful battle. But
they rallied round, and stood opposite the Greeks. But the Greeks
retreated, and desisted from slaughter; for they thought that some of
the immortals, from the starry heaven, had descended to aid the Trojans,
in such a way did they rally. But Hector exhorted the Trojans,
exclaiming aloud:

"Courageous Trojans and far-summoned[239] allies, be men, my friends,
and recall to mind your daring valour, whilst I go to Ilium, and tell to
the aged counsellors, and to our wives, to pray to the gods, and to vow
them hecatombs."

   [Footnote 239: Or τηλεκλειτοί, far-famed. See Anthon on v. 491.]

Thus having spoken, crest-tossing Hector departed; but about him the
black hide, the border which surrounded his bossy shield, kept striking
his ankles and his neck.

But Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, and the son of Tydeus met in the midst
of both armies, eager to fight. But when now they were near, going
against each other, Diomede, brave in the din of war, first addressed
him:

"Who of mortal men art thou, O most brave? For never yet have I beheld
thee in the glorious fight: but now indeed thou hast far surpassed all
in thy confidence, since thou hast awaited my long-shadowed spear.
Certainly they are sons of the hapless who meet my strength. But, if one
of the immortals, thou art come from heaven, I would not fight with the
celestial gods. For valiant Lycurgus, the son of Dryas, did not live
long, who contended with the heavenly gods; he who once pursued the
nurses of raving Bacchus through sacred Nyssa; but they all at once cast
their sacred implements[240] on the ground, smitten by man-slaying
Lycurgus with an ox-goad; but Bacchus, too, terrified, sunk under the
wave of the sea, and Thetis received him affrighted in her bosom; for
dreadful trembling had seized him, on account of the threat of the man.
With him the peaceful-living gods were afterwards enraged, and the son
of Saturn rendered him blind, nor did he live much longer, for he became
an object of aversion to all the immortal gods. Wherefore I should not
wish to fight with the blessed gods. But if thou art any one of mortals,
who eat the fruit of the earth, come hither, that thou mayest speedily
reach the goal of death."

   [Footnote 240: Not merely the thyrsi. See Anthon.]

Him then the renowned son of Hippolochus addressed in turn: "Magnanimous
son of Tydeus, why dost thou inquire of my race? As is the race of
leaves, even such is the race of men.[241] Some leaves the wind sheds
upon the ground, but the fructifying wood produces others, and these
grow up in the season of spring. Such is the generation of men; one
produces, another ceases [to do so]. But if thou wouldst learn even
these things, that thou mayest well know my lineage (for many know it),
there is a city, Ephyra, in a nook of horse-pasturing Argos; there dwelt
Sisyphus, who was the most cunning of mortals, Sisyphus, son of Æolus;
and he begat a son, Glaucus. But Glaucus begat blameless Bellerophon; to
whom the gods gave beauty and agreeable manliness. But against him
Prœtus devised evils in his soul: who accordingly banished him from the
state (since he was far the best of the Greeks; for Jove had subjected
them to his sceptre). With him the wife of Prœtus, noble Antea,[242]
passionately longed to be united in secret love; but by no means could
she persuade just-minded, wise-reflecting Bellerophon. She, therefore,
telling a falsehood, thus addressed king Prœtus: 'Mayest thou be dead, O
Prœtus! or do thou slay Bellerophon, who desired to be united in love
with me against my will.' Thus she said: but rage possessed the king at
what he heard. He was unwilling, indeed, to slay him, for he scrupled
this in his mind; but he sent him into Lycia, and gave to him fatal
characters, writing many things of deadly purport on a sealed tablet;
and ordered him to show it to his father-in-law, to the end that he
might perish. He therefore went into Lycia, under the blameless escort
of the gods; but when now he had arrived at Lycia and at the river
Xanthus, the king of wide Lycia honoured him with a willing mind. Nine
days did he entertain him hospitably, and sacrificed nine oxen; but when
the tenth rosy-fingered morn appeared, then indeed he interrogated him,
and desired to see the token,[243] whatever it was, that he brought from
his son-in-law Prœtus. But after he had received the fatal token of his
son-in-law, first he commanded him to slay the invincible Chimæra; but
she was of divine race, not of men, in front a lion, behind a dragon, in
the middle a goat,[244] breathing forth the dreadful might of gleaming
fire. And her indeed he slew, relying on the signs of the gods. Next he
fought with the illustrious Solymi: and he said that he entered on this
as the fiercest fight among men. Thirdly, he slew the man-opposing
Amazons. But for him returning the king wove another wily plot.
Selecting the bravest men from wide Lycia, he placed an ambuscade; but
they never returned home again, for blameless Bellerophon slew them all.
But when [Iobates] knew that he was the offspring of a god, he detained
him there, and gave him his daughter:[245] he also gave him half of all
his regal honour. The Lycians also separated for him an enclosure of
land, excelling all others, pleasant, vine-bearing, and arable, that he
might cultivate it. But this woman brought forth three children to
warlike Bellerophon, Isandrus, Hippolochus, and Laodamia. Provident
Jove, indeed, had clandestine intercourse with Laodamia, and she brought
forth godlike, brazen-helmed Sarpedon. But when now even he
[Bellerophon] was become odious to all the gods, he, on his part,
wandered alone[246] through the Aleïan plain,[247] pining in his soul,
and shunning the path of men. But Mars, insatiable of war, slew his son
Isandrus, fighting against the illustrious Solymi. And golden-reined
Diana, being enraged, slew his daughter. But Hippolochus begat me, and
from him I say that I am born; me he sent to Troy, and gave me very many
commands, always to fight bravely, and to be superior to others; and not
to disgrace the race of my fathers, who were by far the bravest in
Ephyra, and ample Lycia. From this race and blood do I boast to be."

   [Footnote 241: On this popular Homeric proverb, see Duport, Gnom.
   Hom. p. 31, sq.]

   [Footnote 242: She is more frequently called Sthenobœa, or
   Sthenebœa, as by Apollodor. ii. 3,1; Serv. on Æn. v. 118.
   Fulgentius, iii. præf., agrees with Homer, giving a ridiculously
   philosophical explanation of the whole story.]

   [Footnote 243: Although Apollodorus, l. c. says, ἔδωκεν έπιστολὰς
   αὐτῷ πρὸς Ίοζάτην κομίσειν, and Hygin. Fab. lvii. "Scripsit
   tabellas, et mittit eum ad Iobaten regem," there is no reason to
   believe that letters, properly so called, were yet invented. See
   Knight, Prolegg. p. lxxiv. lxxxii.; Wood, on the original genius
   of Homer, p. 249, sqq.; Müller, Lit. of Greece, iv. 5 (Bulwer,
   Athens, i. 8, boldly advocates the contrary opinion); and
   Anthon's note. Compare the similar story of Phædra and
   Hippolytus.]

   [Footnote 244: For the different descriptions of the Chimæra, the
   mythological student may compare Muncker on Hygin. Fab. lvii. p.
   104.]

   [Footnote 245: Philonoë, the sister of Antea.]

   [Footnote 246: This "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon has been
   well illustrated by Duport, p. 31. Burton, Anatomy, p. 259,
   observes, "They delight in floods and waters, desert places, to
   walk alone in orchards, gardens, private walks, back lanes,
   averse from company, as Diogenes in his tub, or Timon
   Misanthropus; they abhor all companions at last, even their
   nearest acquaintances and most familiar friends; confining
   themselves therefore to their private houses or chambers, they
   will diet themselves, feed and live alone." Hence melancholy was
   called the "morbus Bellerophonteus." See Bourdelot on Heliodor.
   p. 25.]

   [Footnote 247: Properly, "the Plain of Wandering." It lay between
   the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in Cilicia. Cf. Dionys. Perieg.
   872. Κεῖθι δὲ καὶ πεδίον τὸ Ἀλήϊον, οὗ κατὰ νῶτα Ἀνθρώπων
   ἀπάνευθεν ἀλώμενος ίνδιάασκε.]

Thus he said: and Diomede, valiant in the din of war, rejoiced. His
spear indeed he fixed in the all-nurturing earth, and next addressed the
shepherd of the people in courteous words:

"Certainly thou art my father's ancient guest; for in his halls noble
Œneus once entertained blameless Bellerophon, having detained him for
twenty days; and they bestowed valuable gifts of hospitality on each
other. Œneus on his part gave a belt shining with purple; and
Bellerophon in turn a golden double cup; and this I left in my halls
when I was coming hither. But Tydeus I remember not, for he left me
whilst I was yet young, when the people of the Greeks perished at
Thebes. Wherefore I am a guest friend to thee in the midst of Argos, and
thou art the same to me in Lycia, whenever I shall visit their state.
But let us also in the crowd avoid even each other's spears. For there
are many Trojans and illustrious allies for me to slay, whomsoever the
deity shall present, and I shall overtake with my feet. And there are
many Greeks in turn for thee to slay, whomsoever thou canst. But let us
exchange arms with each other, that even these may know that we profess
to be friends by our ancestors."

Thus then having spoken, leaping down from their steeds, they took each
other's hand, and plighted faith. Then Saturnian Jove took away prudence
from Glaucus, who exchanged armour with Diomede, the son of Tydeus,
[giving] golden [arms] for brazen; the value of a hundred beeves[248]
for the value of nine.

But when Hector arrived at the Scæan gates and the beech-tree, around
him ran the Trojan wives and daughters inquiring for their sons, their
brothers, their friends, and husbands. But he then ordered all in order
to supplicate the gods, for evils were impending over many.

But when now he had arrived at the very beautiful dwelling of Priam,
built with well-polished porticoes; but in it were fifty chambers[249]
of polished marble, built near one another, where lay the sons of Priam
with their lawful wives; and opposite, on the other side, within the
hall, were the twelve roofed chambers of his daughters, of polished
marble, built near to one another, where the sons-in-law of Priam slept
with their chaste wives. There his fond mother met him, as she was going
to Laodice, the most excellent in form of her daughters: and she hung
upon his hand, and addressed him, and spoke:

   [Footnote 248: See Gellius, ii. 23. It must be remembered that in
   the ancient times, when there was no money, cattle formed the
   standard of barter.]

   [Footnote 249: Cf. Virg. Æn. ii. 503; Eur. Hec. 421.]

"My son, why hast thou come, having left the bold fight? Certainly the
abominable sons of the Greeks harass thee much, fighting around thy
city: thy mind hath urged thee to come hither, to uplift thy hands to
Jove from the lofty citadel. But wait till I bring thee genial wine,
that first thou mayest make a libation to Jove, and to the other
immortal gods, and then thou shalt refresh thyself, if thou wilt drink.
For to a wearied man wine greatly increases strength; since thou art
wearied aiding thy kinsmen."

But her mighty crest-tossing Hector then answered: "Bring me not genial
wine, venerable mother, lest thou enervate me, and I forget my might and
valour. But I dread to pour out dark-red wine to Jove with unwashed
hands: nor is it by any means lawful for me, denied with blood and gore,
to offer vows to the cloud-compelling son of Saturn. But go thou to the
temple of Minerva the pillager, with victims, having assembled the
matrons of distinction. And the robe which is the most beautiful and the
largest in the palace, and by far the most esteemed by thyself, that
place on the knees of the fair-haired goddess, and vow that thou wilt
sacrifice to her, in her temple, twelve heifers, yearlings, ungoaded, if
she will take compassion on the city, and the wives and infant children
of the Trojans; if she will avert from sacred Ilium the son of Tydeus,
that fierce warrior, the valiant author of terror. Do thou, on thy part,
go to the temple of the pillager Minerva; but I will go after Paris,
that I may call him, if he is willing to hear me speaking. Would that
the earth might there open for him, for him hath Olympian Jove reared as
a great bane to the Trojans, to magnanimous Priam, and to his sons.
Could I but behold him descending to Hades, I might say that my soul had
forgotten its joyless woe."

Thus he spoke: but she, going to her palace, gave orders to her maids:
and they assembled through the city the matrons of distinction. But she
descended into her fragrant chamber, where were her
variously-embroidered robes, the works of Sidonian females, which
godlike Alexander himself had brought from Sidon, sailing over the broad
ocean, in that voyage in which he carried off Helen, sprung from a noble
sire. Hecuba, taking one of these which was most beauteous with various
hues, and largest, brought it as a gift to Minerva; and it glittered
like a star, and lay the undermost of all. But she hastened to set out,
and many venerable matrons hurried along with her.

But when they arrived at the temple of Minerva, in the lofty citadel,
fair-cheeked Theano, the daughter of Cisseus, wife of horse-breaking
Antenor, opened to them the gates; for the Trojans had made her
priestess of Minerva. They all, with a loud wailing, upraised their
hands to Minerva. But fair-cheeked Theano having received the garment,
placed it on the knees of fair-haired Minerva, and making vows, thus
prayed to the daughter of mighty Jove:

"Venerable Minerva, guardian of the city, divine one of goddesses, break
now the spear of Diomede, and grant that he may fall prostrate before
the Scæan gates, that we may forthwith sacrifice to thee in thy temple
twelve yearling untamed heifers, if thou wilt pity the city, and the
wives of the Trojans, and their infant children."

So she spake in prayer, but Pallas Minerva refused. Thus they, on their
part, offered vows to the daughter of mighty Jove.

But Hector had gone to the beautiful halls of Alexander, which he
himself had built with the aid of men, who then were the most skilful
artificers in fruitful Troy: who made for him a chamber, a
dwelling-room, and hall, in the lofty citadel, near the palaces of Priam
and Hector. There Jove-beloved Hector entered, and in his hand he held a
spear of eleven cubits; the brazen point of the spear shone in front,
and a golden ring encircled it. But him he found in his chamber
preparing his very beauteous armour, his shield and corslet, and fitting
his curved bow. Argive Helen sat amongst her female servants, and
assigned their tasks to her maids of renowned work. But Hector, seeing,
reproached him with foul words:

"Infatuate; not befittingly hast thou conceived this rage in thy mind:
the people are perishing, fighting around the city and the lofty wall:
and on thy account the battle and war are blazing around the city. Truly
thou wouldst thyself reprove another, if ever thou sawest any person
remiss in the hateful battle. But arise, lest perchance the city should
quickly blaze with hostile fire."

But him godlike Alexander then addressed: "Hector, since thou hast with
reason reproved me, and not without reason, therefore will I tell thee;
but do thou attend and hear me. I was sitting in my chamber, neither so
much from anger nor indignation against the Trojans, but [because] I
wished to give way to grief. But now my wife, advising me with soothing
words, hath urged me to the battle, and to myself also it seems to be
better: for victory alternates to men. But come now, wait, let me put on
my martial arms; or go on, and I will follow, and I think that I shall
overtake thee."

Thus he said, but crest-tossing Hector did not answer him. But Helen
addressed him [Hector] with soothing words: "Brother-in-law of me,
shameless authoress of mischief-devising, fearful wretch, would that, on
the day when first my mother brought me forth, a destructive tempest of
wind had seized and borne me to a mountain, or into the waves of the
much-resounding ocean, where the billow would have swept me away before
these doings had occurred. But since the gods have thus decreed these
evils, I ought at least to have been the wife of a braver man, who
understood both the indignation and the many reproaches of men. But this
man's sentiments are neither constant now, nor will they be hereafter;
wherefore I think he will reap the fruits [of them]. But come now,
enter, and sit on this seat, brother-in-law, since toils have greatly
encompassed thy mind, on account of shameless me, and of the guilt of
Alexander; on whom Jove hath imposed an unhappy lot, that, even in time
to come, we should be a subject of song to future men."

But her mighty crest-tossing Hector then answered: "Do not bid me sit,
Helen, though courteous, for thou wilt not persuade me. For now is my
mind urged on, that I may aid the Trojans, who have great regret for me
absent. But do thou arouse him [Paris], and let him hasten, that he may
overtake me being within the city. For I will go home, that I may see my
domestics, my beloved wife, and my infant son. For I know not whether I
shall ever again return to them, or whether the gods will now subdue me
under the hands of the Greeks."

Thus having said, crest-tossing Hector departed; and immediately he then
arrived at his well-situated palace, nor did he find white-armed
Andromache in the halls; but she stood lamenting and weeping on the
tower, with her son and her well-robed maid. But Hector, when he found
not his blameless wife within, went and stood at the threshold, and said
to the female servants:

"I pray you, maids, tell me truly whither went white-armed Andromache
from the palace? Has she gone anywhere [to the dwellings] of her
husband's sisters, or [to those] of any of her well-robed
brother-in-laws' wives, or to the temple of Minerva, where the other
fair-haired Trojan matrons are appeasing the dreadful goddess?"

Him then the active housewife in turn addressed: "Hector, since thou
biddest me to tell the truth, she has not gone to any of her husband's
sisters, nor to any of her well-robed brother-in-laws' wives, nor to the
temple of Minerva, where the other fair-haired Trojan matrons are
appeasing the dreadful goddess. But she went to the lofty tower of
Ilium, when she heard that the Trojans were worn out, and that the
valour of the Greeks was great. She is now on her way, hastening to the
wall, like unto one frenzied, and the nurse, along with her, bears the
child."

Thus spoke the housewife, but Hector hastened away from the palace, back
the same way through the well-built streets. When he had arrived at the
Scæan gates, after passing through the great city (for by this way he
was about to pass out into the plain), there met him his richly-dowered
spouse running, Andromache, daughter of magnanimous Eetion: Eetion, who
dwelt in woody Hypoplacus, in Hypoplacian Thebes, reigning over Cilician
men. His daughter then was possessed by brazen-helmed Hector. She then
met him; and with her came a maid, carrying in her bosom the tender
child, an infant quite, the only son of Hector, like unto a beauteous
star. Him Hector had named Scamandrius, but others Astyanax; for Hector
alone protected Ilium. He indeed, gazing in silence upon his son,
smiled. But Andromache stood near to him, weeping, and she hung upon his
hand, and addressed him, and spoke:

"Strange man! this thy valour will destroy thee; nor dost thou pity thy
infant child and unhappy me, who very soon will be bereft of thee, for
presently the Greeks will slay thee, all attacking thee at once. For me
much better it were to sink into the earth, when bereft of thee; for
there will no longer be any other comfort for me when thou shalt draw on
thy destruction; but sorrows only. Nor have I father or venerable
mother. For divine Achilles slew my father, and laid waste the
well-inhabited city of the Cilicians, lofty-gated Thebes. He slew
Eetion, but spoiled him not, he scrupled in his mind [to do] that; but
he burned him together with his well-wrought arms, and heaped a tomb
over him, and around [him] the mountain nymphs, daughters of
ægis-bearing Jove, planted elms. Moreover, the seven brothers besides,
whom I had at home, all these indeed departed to Hades in one day. For
divine, swift-footed Achilles slew them all, amidst their crooked hoofed
oxen and their snowy sheep. And my mother, who ruled in woody
Hypoplacus, after that he had led her hither with other treasures, he
sent back at liberty, having received countless ransom-gifts. But her
the shaft-rejoicing Diana slew in my father's hall. But, O Hector, to me
thou art both father and venerable mother and brother; thou art also my
blooming consort. But come now, pity me, and abide here in the tower,
nor make thy child an orphan and thy wife a widow. And place a company
at the wild fig-tree, where the city is chiefly easy of ascent, and the
wall can be scaled. For going to this very quarter, the bravest [of the
Greeks] have thrice assaulted, the two Ajaces, and most renowned
Idomeneus, and the sons of Atreus, and the brave son of Tydeus.
Certainly some person well skilled in prophecy mentioned it to them, or
their own mind impels and orders them."

But her then in turn the mighty crest-tossing Hector addressed:
"Assuredly to me also are all these things a subject of anxiety, dear
wife, but I am exceedingly ashamed of the Trojans and the long-robed
Trojan dames, if I, like a dastard, [keeping] aloof, should avoid the
battle: nor does my mind incline me thus, for I have learned to be
always brave, and to fight in the foremost among the Trojans, seeking to
gain both my father's great glory and mine own. For well I know this in
my mind and soul; a day will arrive when sacred Ilium shall perish, and
Priam, and the people of Priam skilled in the ashen spear. But to me the
grief that is to come will not be so great on account of the Trojans,
neither for Hecuba herself, nor for king Priam, nor for my brothers,
who, many and excellent, are destined to fall in the dust beneath
hostile men, as for thee, when some one of the brazen-mailed Greeks
shall lead thee away weeping, having deprived thee of the day of
freedom. And, perchance, being in Argos, thou mayest weave the web at
the command of some other dame, and bear water from the fountain of
Messeïs, or Hyperia, very unwillingly; and hard necessity will oppress
thee; whilst some one, hereafter beholding thee pouring forth tears,
will say, 'This was the wife of Hector, who was the bravest in battle of
the horse-breaking Trojans, when they fought round Ilium.' Thus will
some one hereafter say; but fresh anguish will be thine, from the want
of such a husband, to avert the day of servitude. But may the heaped
earth cover me dead, before I hear of this lamentation and abduction."

Thus having said, illustrious Hector stretched out [his arms] for his
son; but the child, screaming, shrunk back to the bosom of the
well-zoned nurse, affrighted at the aspect of his dear sire, fearing the
brass and the horse-haired crest, seeing it nodding dreadfully from the
top of the helmet: gently his loving father smiled, and his revered
mother. Instantly illustrious Hector took the helmet from his head, and
laid it all-glittering on the ground; and having kissed his beloved
child, and fondled him in his hands, thus spoke, praying to Jove and to
the other gods:

"Jove, and ye other gods, grant that this my son also may become, even
as I am, distinguished amongst the Trojans, so powerful in might, and
bravely to rule over Ilium. And may some one hereafter say [concerning
him], returning from the fight, 'He indeed is much braver than his
sire.' And let him bear away the bloody spoils, having slain the foe,
and let his mother rejoice in her soul."

Thus having said, he placed the boy in the hands of his beloved spouse;
but she smiling tearfully received him in her fragrant bosom. Her
husband regarding her, pitied her, and soothed her with his hand, and
addressed her, and said:

"Beloved, be not at all too sad in thine heart on my account. For no man
shall send me prematurely to the shades. But I think there is no one of
men who has escaped fate, neither the coward nor the brave man, after he
has once been born. But do thou, going home, take care of thy own works,
thy web and distaff, and command thy maids to perform their task; but
war shall be a care to all the men who are born in Ilium, and
particularly to me."

Thus having spoken, illustrious Hector took up the horse-haired helmet,
and his beloved wife departed home, looking back from time to time, and
shedding copious tears. Then immediately she reached the very commodious
palace of man-slaying Hector, and within she found many maids, and in
all of them she excited grief. They, indeed, bewailed in his own palace
Hector still alive, for they thought that he would never return back
again from battle, escaping the might and the hands of the Greeks.

Nor did Paris delay in his lofty halls; but he, after he had put on his
famous arms, variegated with brass, then hastened through the city,
relying on his swift feet. And as[250] when a stabled courser, fed with
barley at the stall, having broken his cord, runs prancing over the
plain, elate with joy, being accustomed to bathe in some fair-flowing
river. He bears aloft his head, and his mane is tossed about on his
shoulders: but he, relying on his beauty,[251] his knees easily bear him
to the accustomed pastures[252] of the mares. Thus Paris, the son of
Priam, shining in arms like the sun, exulting descended down from the
citadel of Pergamus, but his swift feet bore him, and immediately after
he found his noble brother Hector, when he was now about to depart from
the place where he was conversing with his spouse.

   [Footnote 250: Cf. Ennius apud Macrob. iv. 3:

    "Et tunc sicut equus, qui de præsepibus actus,
    Vincla sueis magneis animeis abrumpit, et inde
    Fert sese campi per cærula, lætaque prata,
    Celso pectore, sæpe jubam quassat simul altam;
    Spiritus ex anima calida spumas agit albas."]

   [Footnote 251: Observe the anacoluthon.]

   [Footnote 252: An instance of hendiadys.]

Him godlike Alexander first addressed: "Honoured brother, assuredly now
I am altogether detaining thee, although hastening, nor have I come in
due time as thou didst order."

Him then crest-tossing Hector answering addressed: "Strange man! not any
man indeed, who is just, could dispraise thy deeds of war, for thou art
brave. But willingly art thou remiss, and dost not wish [to fight]; and
my heart is saddened in my breast, when I hear dishonourable things of
thee from the Trojans, who have much toil on thy account. But let us
away, these things we shall arrange hereafter, if ever Jove shall grant
us to place a free goblet in our halls to the heavenly everlasting gods,
when we shall have repulsed the well-greaved Greeks from Troy."




                          BOOK THE SEVENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Hector challenges the bravest of the Greeks to single combat, and nine
of the chiefs having cast lots, Ajax is appointed to meet him. Having
protracted the contest till night, the combatants exchange gifts, and
separate. A truce is then made for the purpose of burying the dead, and
the Greeks fortify their camp.


Thus having said, illustrious Hector rushed forth from the gates, and
with him went his brother Alexander, for both were eager in soul to wage
war and to fight. As when the deity hath given a prosperous wind to
expecting mariners, after they have become weary, agitating the deep
with well-polished oars, and their limbs are relaxed with toil; thus
then did those two appear to the expecting Trojans. Then they slew, the
one,[253] indeed, Menesthius, son of king Areithoüs, who dwelt in Arne,
whom the club-bearer Areithoüs and large-eyed Philomedusa brought forth;
but Hector smote Eïoneus with his sharp spear upon the neck, under his
well-wrought brazen helmet,[254] and relaxed his limbs. And Glaucus, son
of Hippolochus, leader of the Lycian heroes, in fierce engagement smote
Iphinous, son of Dexias, upon the shoulder with his spear, as he vaulted
on his swift mares.

   [Footnote 253: _I. e_. Paris. The construction is an instance of
   the σχήμα καθ' όλον και μέρος. See Jelf, Gk. Gr. §478, and my
   note on Æsch. Prom. p. 8, ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 254: Apollonius, Lex. p. 734. seems to regard the
   στεφάνη as a distinct kind of helmet, or cap. So, also, the
   Schol. and Hesych. t. ii. p. 186, and p. 1266. Others understand
   the rim of the helmet. Paschal, de Coronis, i. 2: "Eam galeæ
   partem quam Hesychius dicit habere εξοχάς, id quod in galea
   eminentissimum est. Et vero apud Plutarchum distinguitur το
   κράνος galea από της στεφάνης, ab ejus parte quæ est in ipsius
   summitate."]

But he fell from his mares on the ground, and his limbs were relaxed.

But when the azure-eyed goddess Minerva saw them destroying the Greeks,
in fierce engagement, she descended straightway, rushing down from the
tops of Olympus to sacred Ilium. Then Apollo hastened to meet her,
having perceived her from Pergamus, for he wished victory to the
Trojans. And they met each other at the beech-tree. Her first king
Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed:

"Why again dost thou, O daughter of mighty Jove, come ardently from
Olympus, and why has thy mighty soul impelled thee? It is that thou
mightst give to the Greeks the doubtful victory of battle, for thou dost
not pity the Trojans perishing. But if thou obeyest me in aught, which
indeed would be much better, let us now make the war and conflict to
cease this day, afterwards shall they fight until they find an end of
Ilium; since it is pleasing to the mind of you goddesses to overthrow
this city." [255]

   [Footnote 255: On the partisan deities for and against Troy, cf.
   Dionys. 817.

         "Ιλιον, ἣν ἐπόλισσε  Ποσειδάων καἰ Απόλλων,
         Ιλιον, ἣν ἀλάπαζαν Ἀθηναίη τε καἰ Ἣρη".

   See Grote's Hist, of Greece, vol. i. p. 68.]

But him in turn the azure-eyed goddess Minerva thus addressed: "Be it
so, Far-darter; for I myself, meditating the same things, came down from
Olympus to the Trojans and the Greeks. But come, how dost thou intend to
make the battle of men to cease?"

Her then in turn king Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed: "Let us arouse
the valiant spirit of horse-breaking Hector, if perchance he will
challenge some one of the Greeks to fight against him singly opposed in
grievous combat. And the well-greaved Greeks enraged will urge on some
single man to fight with noble Hector."

Thus he spoke, nor did the azure-eyed goddess disobey. But Helenus, the
dear son of Priam, perceived in his mind the counsel, which seemed good
to the gods deliberating. He therefore went and stood near Hector, and
thus accosted him:

"Hector, son of Priam, equal to Jove in wisdom, wilt thou obey me in
aught? for I am thy brother. Cause all the rest of the Trojans and the
Greeks to sit down, but do thou thyself challenge whoever is the bravest
of the Greeks to fight against thee in grievous combat. For it is not
yet thy fate to die, and draw on fate; for to this effect have I heard
the voice of the immortal gods."

Thus he spoke. But Hector in turn rejoiced exceedingly, having heard his
advice, and accordingly advancing into the midst, grasping his spear in
the middle, he restrained the phalanxes of the Trojans; and they all sat
down. Agamemnon also caused the well-greaved Greeks to sit down; and
Minerva also, and silver-bowed Apollo, sat like unto vulture birds, on a
lofty beech-tree of their sire, the ægis-bearing Jove, delighted with
the heroes; of these the ranks sat thick, horribly bristling with
shields, and helmets, and spears. And as the ripple of the west wind,
just risen, is poured over the ocean, and the sea begins to darken under
it, such sat the ranks of the Greeks and Trojans in the plain: but
Hector thus spoke in the midst of both armies:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, and ye well-greaved Greeks, whilst I speak what
the mind in my breast commands me. Saturnian Jove, indeed, sitting
aloft, has not ratified the leagues, but devising evils against both
sides, ordains them, till either ye take well-turreted Troy, or
yourselves fall at your sea-traversing ships. Amongst you, indeed, there
are the bravest of all the Greeks, of whom whomsoever his mind orders to
fight with me, let him come hither from amongst all, to be a champion
against noble Hector. This then do I propose, but let Jove be our
witness; if, on the one hand, he shall slay me with his long-pointed
spear, having stripped off my armour, let him bear it to the hollow
ships, but send my body home, that the Trojans and the wives of the
Trojans may make me, deceased, a partaker of the funeral pyre. But if,
on the other hand, I shall slay him, and Apollo shall give me glory,
having stripped off his armour, I will bear it to sacred Ilium, and I
will hang it up on the temple of far-darting Apollo: but his body I will
send back to the well-benched ships, that the long-haired Greeks may
perform his exsequies, and pile up for him a tomb on the wide
Hellespont. And hereafter will some one of future men say, as he sails
over the sea in his many-benched ship: 'This, indeed, is the tomb of a
hero long since deceased, whom once, bearing himself doughtily,
illustrious Hector slew.' Thus hereafter will some one say; but this my
glory shall never perish."

Thus he said, but all became mute in silence. Ashamed indeed they were
to refuse, and yet they dreaded to accept [the challenge]. At length,
however, Menelaus stood up, and spoke amongst them, rebuking them with
reproaches, and he groaned greatly in spirit:

"Alas! ye boasters! Greek dames! no longer Grecian men! certainly will
these things be a disgrace, most grievously grievous, if none of the
Greeks will now go against Hector. But may ye all become water and
earth, sitting there each of you, faint-hearted; utterly inglorious: but
I myself will be armed against him. But the issues of victory are rested
in the immortal gods."

Thus having spoken, he put on his beautiful arms. Then, indeed, O
Menelaus, would the end of life have befallen thee at the hands of
Hector, since he was much the better man, had not the princes of the
Greeks, starting up suddenly, restrained thee, and the son of Atreus
himself, wide-ruling Agamemnon, seized thee by the right hand, and
addressed thee, and spoke:

"Thou art mad, O Menelaus! offspring of Jove, nor hast thou any need of
such madness: restrain thyself, although grieved, nor wish for the sake
of contention to fight with a braver man than thyself, Hector, the son
of Priam, whom others also dread. Nay, even Achilles, who is much braver
than thou, dreads to meet him[256] in the glorious fight. But now, going
to the troop of thy companions, sit down. Against him the Greeks will
set up some other champion. Although he be intrepid and insatiable of
battle, I think that he will gladly bend his knee,[257] if he shall
escape from the hostile battle and the grievous fight."

   [Footnote 256: Lesbonax, περί σχημ. p. 182, reads τούτόν
   γε--άντιολήσαι, which Valckenaer, and with reason, thinks a more
   _recherché_ and genuine reading than τούτῳ. Lesbonax compares the
   Attic phrase άρέσκει με for μοι Cf. Aristoph. Ran. 103, with the
   Scholiast.]

   [Footnote 257: _I.e._ sit down through fatigue, "de iis qui longo
   labore seu cuisu fessi quiescunt et vires recipiunt."--Heyne.]

Thus speaking, the hero dissuaded his brother's mind, advising him
rightly; and he obeyed. His joyful attendants then stripped the armour
from his shoulders. Then Nestor arose amidst the Greeks, and said:

"O gods, surely great grief comes upon the Grecian land. Certainly the
aged knight Peleus, the excellent counsellor and adviser of the
Myrmidons, will greatly lament, who formerly interrogated me, greatly
rejoiced in his palace, inquiring the race and offspring of all the
Greeks. If he now heard of them all crouching down under Hector, often
indeed would he uplift his hands to the immortals, [praying] that his
soul, [separated] from his limbs, might depart into the house of Pluto.
For would, O father Jove, and Minerva, and Apollo, I were young, as when
the assembled Pylians and the spear-skilled Arcadians fought by the
rapid Celadon, at the walls of Phæa, about the streams of Jardan. With
them Ereuthalion, god-like hero, stood in the van, bearing on his
shoulders the armour of king Areïthous, of noble Areïthous, whom men and
beauteous-girt women called by surname Corynetes, since he fought not
with a bow, nor with a long spear, but used to break the phalanxes with
an iron club. Him Lycurgus slew by stratagem, not by strength, in a
narrow defile, where his iron club did not ward off destruction from
him; for Lycurgus, anticipating, pierced him right through the waist
with his spear, and he was dashed to the ground on his back; and he
spoiled him of the armour which brazen Mars had given him, and he indeed
afterwards bore them himself in the battle of Mars. But when Lycurgus
had grown old in his palaces, he gave them to his beloved attendant
Ereuthalion, to be borne: and he, having his armour, challenged all the
bravest: but these trembled and feared very much: nor did any one dare
[to withstand him]. But my bold mind, by its confidence, urged me on to
fight him: now I was the youngest of them all; and I fought with him,
and Minerva gave me glory. And I slew this most mighty and valiant hero,
for vast he lay stretched out on this side and on that. Would that [now]
I were thus young, and my strength entire--so quickly should
crest-tossing Hector meet with a contest. But those of you who are the
bravest of all the Greeks, not even you promptly desire to go against
Hector."

Thus did the old man upbraid them; and nine heroes in all arose. Much
the first arose Agamemnon, the king of men; after him arose brave
Diomede, son of Tydeus, and after them the Ajaces, clad in impetuous
valour: after them Idomeneus, and Meriones, the armour-bearer of
Idomeneus, equal to man-slaughtering Mars. After them Eurypylus, the
gallant son of Evæmon. And there [also arose] Thoas, son of Andræmon,
and divine Ulysses. All these wished to fight with noble Hector. But
these again the Gerenian knight Nestor addressed:

"Decide now, exclusively by lot, who shall obtain [the accepting of the
challenge]; for he indeed will aid the well-greaved Greeks; and he will
also delight his own soul, if he shall escape safe from the hostile war
and the grievous fight."

Thus he spoke, and they marked each his own lot, and they cast them into
the helmet of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. The people supplicated, and
raised their hands to the gods, and thus would one of them say, looking
towards the wide heaven:

"O father Jove, grant that Ajax obtain the lot, or the son of Tydeus, or
the king himself of rich Mycenæ."

Thus they spake, and the Gerenian knight Nestor shook [the lots], and
the lot of Ajax, which indeed they wished for, leaped forth from the
helmet. Then a herald bearing it around through the multitude, beginning
at the right, showed it to all the chiefs of the Greeks. But they, not
recognizing it, disclaimed it severally. But, when at last the herald,
carrying it round through the multitude, came to him, illustrious Ajax,
who had inscribed and cast it into the helmet, he [Ajax] stretched forth
his hand, and the herald standing near, placed it in it. Having
inspected it, he knew his own mark, and rejoiced in his soul. He cast it
on the ground at his feet, and said:

"O friends, surely the lot is mine, and I myself rejoice in my soul,
since I think that I shall conquer noble Hector. But come, while I put
on my warlike arms, do ye meantime pray to Jove, the Saturnian king,
silently within yourselves, that the Trojans may not hear; or even
openly, since we fear no one at all. For no one willingly shall, by
force, overcome me against my will, nor through my inexperience; since I
hope I have not been so ignorantly[258] born and bred at Salamis."

   [Footnote 258: I. e. ignorant of arms.]

Thus he spoke: but they prayed to Jove, the Saturnian king; and thus
would one of them say looking towards the wide heaven:

"O father Jove, ruling from Ida, most glorious, most mighty, grant to
Ajax to bear away victory, and illustrious glory. But if thou lovest
Hector also, and carest for him, grant equal might and glory to both."

Thus they spake, and Ajax was arming himself in splendid brass. But when
he had put on all his armour around his body, then he rushed forward: as
moves mighty Mars, who goes to war amidst men, whom the son of Saturn
has engaged to fight with the strength of soul-gnawing strife, such
mighty Ajax advanced, the bulwark of the Greeks, smiling with grim
countenance; but he advanced, taking long strides with his feet beneath,
brandishing his long-shadowed spear. The Greeks, on their part, rejoiced
much on beholding him, but dire dismay seized the Trojans, each one as
to his limbs, and the soul panted in the breast of Hector himself. But
now he could not in anywise retract through fear, nor retire back into
the crowd of the people, since he had challenged to the fight. But Ajax
drew near, bearing a shield, like a tower, brazen, covered with seven
ox-hides, which for him the artist Tychius labouring had wrought,
dwelling at his home in Hyla, by far the most excellent of
leather-cutters, who for him had made a moveable shield, of seven hides
of very fat bulls, and drawn over it an eighth [layer] of brass.
Carrying this before his breast, Telamonian Ajax stood very near Hector,
and menacing addressed him:

"O Hector, now thou, alone with me alone, shalt plainly know, what kind
of chiefs are present with the Greeks, even besides Achilles, the
breaker of ranks, the lion-hearted. But he, indeed, abides at his
high-beaked sea-traversing ships, enraged against Agamemnon, the
shepherd of the people. Yet we are such, even many of us, who can go
against thee; but begin the battle and the strife."

Him then in turn the mighty crest-tossing Hector addressed: "Thou
Jove-sprung Ajax, son of Telamon, ruler of forces, tamper not with me as
with a weak boy, or a woman, who knows not warlike deeds. But I well
know both battles and man-slaughterings. I know how to shift my dry
shield to the right and to the left; wherefore to me it belongs to fight
unwearied. I am also skilled to rush to the battle of swift steeds. I
know too, how, in hostile array, to move skilfully in honour of glowing
Mars. But I do not desire to wound thee, being such, watching
stealthily, but openly, if haply I may strike thee."

He spoke, and brandishing hurled forth his long-shadowed spear, and
smote the mighty seven-hided shield of Ajax on the outside brass, which
was the eighth [layer] thereon. And the unwearied brass cutting through,
penetrated six folds, and was stuck fast in the seventh hide. Next,
Jove-sprung Ajax in turn sent forth his very long spear, and struck the
all-equal shield of Priam's son. Through the shining shield passed the
impetuous spear, and was fastened in his very ingeniously-wrought
corslet, and from the opposite side the spear cut his tunic near the
flank. But he inclined himself, and avoided black death. Then they both,
having drawn out their long spears with their hands, joined battle, like
unto raw-devouring lions, or wild boars, whose strength is not feeble.
Then indeed the son of Priam struck the midst of his [Ajax's] shield
with his spear; it broke not through the brass, but the point of it was
bent. But Ajax, bounding forward, pierced his shield: and the spear went
right through, and repelled him as he rushed on: it glanced over his
neck, cutting it, and black gore gushed forth. But not even thus did
crest-tossing Hector cease from the battle: but retiring back, he seized
in his hand, a black, rough, huge stone, lying in the plain. With it he
struck the mighty seven-hided shield of Ajax, in the midst of the boss,
and the brass rang around. Ajax next taking up a much larger stone,
whirling, discharged it, and applied immense strength. And he broke
through the shield, having struck with a rock like unto a millstone, and
he wounded him in the knee; and he was stretched supine, having come
into violent contact with his shield; but Apollo quickly raised him. And
now in close combat hand to hand, they would have wounded each other
with their swords, had not the heralds, the messengers of gods and men,
arrived, one of the Trojans, the other of the brazen-mailed Greeks,
Talthybius and Idæus, both prudent men. And between both armies they
held their sceptres, but the herald Idæus, skilled in prudent counsels,
said:

"No longer, my dear sons, war or fight, for cloud-collecting Jove loves
you both: ye both are warriors, and this we all know. Night is now
approaching, and it is good to obey night." [259]

   [Footnote 259: Cf. Æn. ii. 8:--

                        ----"et jam nox humida cœlo
      Præcipitat, suadentque cadentia sidera somnos."]

But him Telamonian Ajax answering addressed: "Idæus, order Hector to
speak these words, for he challenged all the bravest [of our side] to
battle. Let him begin, and I will entirely obey, if indeed he does so."

But him crest-tossing Hector addressed in turn: "Ajax, since some god
has given thee size, and might, and prudence, and thou art the most
excellent of the Greeks at the spear, let us now cease from battle and
contest for this day; hereafter will we fight again, till the Deity
shall separate us, and give the victory to either. Now night is
approaching, and it is good to obey night, that thou mayest gladden all
the Greeks at the ships, and chiefly those friends and companions which
are thine; but I will gladden the Trojans and the train-bearing Trojan
matrons, through the great city of king Priam, the dames who, praying
for me, are entering the deities' temple.[260] But come, let us both
mutually give very glorious gifts, that some one of the Greeks and
Trojans may say thus: 'They certainly fought in a soul-gnawing strife,
but then again being reconciled, they parted in friendship.'"

   [Footnote 260: Ἀγών is defined by Apollonius, p. 26, ό τόπος είς
   ὃν συνάγονται. Hesychius, p. 79, makes it equivalent to ἄθροισμα,
   and also calls it the place where combatants fight. Porphyry,
   Quæst. Hom. p. cvii. ed. Barnes, τὸν ναόν ἤτοι ϑεῖον τόπον ὄντα,
   ἢ ϑεῖον ἄθροισμα περιέχοντα. So, also, the Scholiast.]

Thus then having spoken, he gave him a silver-studded sword, presenting
it with the sheath and the well-wrought belt. But Ajax gave [to him] a
belt, splendid with purple. Then they twain being separated, the one
went to the people of the Greeks, and the other to the crowd of the
Trojans: and they rejoiced when they saw him coming alive and safe,
having escaped the strength and the invincible hands of Ajax; and led
him to the city, not having had any hopes that he was safe. But the
well-greaved Greeks, on the other hand, led away Ajax, rejoicing in
victory, to divine Agamemnon. When now they were in the tents of the son
of Atreus, then Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed for them an ox, a
male, five years old, to the most powerful son of Saturn. This they
flayed, and dressed it; made divisions of the whole of it, and skilfully
divided these into smaller portions, and fixed them on spits, and
roasted them very cleverly, and drew off all. But when they had ceased
from labour, and had prepared the banquet, they feasted, nor did their
soul in anywise lack a due proportion of the feast. The valiant son of
Atreus, far-ruling Agamemnon, honoured Ajax with an entire chine.[261]
But when they had dismissed the desire of drink and of food, for them
the aged man Nestor first of all began to frame advice, whose counsel
before also had appeared the best, who, wisely counselling, harangued
them, and said:

   [Footnote 261: The same honour is paid to Æneas in Virg. Æn.
   viii. 181. Cf. Xenoph. Rep. Lac. XV. 4.]

"Son of Atreus, and ye other chiefs of all the Greeks, many of the
long-haired Achæans have perished, whose black blood fierce Mars has now
shed near fair-flowing Scamander, and their souls have descended to the
shades! Therefore it behoves you to cause the battle of the Greeks to
cease with the dawn, and let us, collected together, carry the bodies
hither on chariots, with oxen and mules, and burn them at a little
distance from the ships, that each may carry home the bones [of the
deceased] to their children, when we return again to our father-land.
And let us, going out, heap up in the plain one common tomb for all,
round the pyre, and beside it let us speedily erect lofty towers, as a
bulwark of our ships and of ourselves; and in it let us make a
well-fitted gate, that through it there may be a passage for the
chariots. But outside let us sink, near at hand, a deep trench, which,
being circular, may serve as a defence to both steeds and men, lest at
any time the war of the haughty Trojans should press sorely."

Thus he spoke, and all the princes approved of his counsel. But of the
Trojans also was a panic-struck and turbulent council held in the lofty
citadel of Ilium, at the gates of Priam; and to them wise Antenor thus
began to harangue:

"Hear me, ye Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may tell you what
the soul in my breast commands me. Come then, let us restore Argive
Helen, and her treasures with her to the sons of Atreus to lead away;
for now we are fighting after having violated the faithful leagues.
Wherefore I think that nothing better will be brought to pass by us,
unless we act thus."

He, having thus said, sat down; but to them arose divine Alexander, the
husband of fair-haired Helen, who answering him spoke winged words:

"O Antenor, thou no longer speakest these things grateful to me. Thou
knowest how to devise another counsel better than this; but if, in
truth, thou speakest this seriously, the gods themselves have now
deprived thee of thy senses. But I will declare my opinion amidst the
horse-subduing Trojans; I openly declare I will not give up my wife: but
the treasures, whatever I have brought home from Argos, all these I am
willing to give, and even to add others from my own home."

Thus having spoken, he sat down; but to them arose Priam, son of
Dardanus, a counsellor equal to the gods; who thus wisely harangued
them, and said:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, and Dardanians, and allies, that I may tell you
what the soul in my breast commands. Now take repast through the army,
as heretofore, and be attentive to the watch, and let each be mindful of
guard. But in the morning let Idæus proceed to the hollow ships, to
announce to the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus, the resolution
of Alexander, on whose account the contention has arisen; and let him
add this prudent request also, whether they wish to desist from
horrid-sounding war, until we burn the dead; afterwards will we fight
again till fate separate us, and give the victory to one or other of
us."

Thus he said: but they heard him very attentively, and obeyed. Then they
took their repast throughout the city, by companies. In the morning
Idæus went to the hollow ships. He found the Greeks, the servants of
Mars, in council, at the stern of[262] Agamemnon's ship: and the
clear-voiced herald, standing in the midst of them, spoke thus:

"Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other chiefs of all the Greeks, Priam and the
other illustrious Trojans command me to tell you, if it be agreeable and
pleasing to you, the determination of Alexander, on whose account this
contention has arisen."

   [Footnote 262: Dative for genitive, by the Schema Colophonium.
   See Lesbonax, p. 181, ed. Valck.]

"Whatever treasures Alexander brought in the hollow ships to Troy, (would
that he first had perished,) all these is he willing to give up, and
even to add others from his own home: but he says that he will not
restore the wedded spouse of glorious Menelaus: certainly the Trojans,
at least, advise him. They also order me to make this proposal, to wit,
whether ye are willing to desist from dreadful-sounding war, until we
shall burn the dead: afterwards we shall fight again, till fate separate
us, and give the victory to one of us."

Thus he said, but they all became mute in silence. At length Diomede,
brave in the din of war, spoke thus amongst them:

"Let none now receive the treasures of Alexander, nor Helen: for it is
plain, even [to him] who is a mere infant, that the issues of
destruction impend over the Trojans."

Thus he said, and all the sons of the Greeks shouted, admiring the words
of horse-breaking Diomede: and then Agamemnon, king of men, thus
addressed Idæus:

"Idæus, thou thyself hearest, indeed, the sentiments of the Greeks, how
they answer thee; and such also pleases me. But concerning the dead, I
grudge not that [you] should burn them; for there is no grudge towards
the dead bodies, when they are dead, hastily to perform their obsequies
with fire:[263] but let loud-resounding Jove, the husband of Juno, be
witness of the treaties."

   [Footnote 263: Literally, "to appease [the dead]."]

Thus having said, he raised his sceptre to all the gods. But Idæus
returned to sacred Ilium. And the Trojans and Dardanians all sat
assembled in council, expecting when Idæus might return. He came, and
declared his message, standing in the midst of them. But they prepared
themselves very speedily for both purposes, some to carry away the
bodies, and others to gather wood. The Greeks also on the other side
hastened from their well-benched ships, some to carry away the bodies,
and others to collect wood.

Then, indeed, the sun freshly struck the fields [with its rays],
ascending heaven from the calmly-flowing, deep-moving ocean. But they
met one another. Then was it difficult to distinguish each man [amongst
the slain]; but washing off with water the bloody gore, and pouring over
them warm tears, they placed them upon the chariots; nor did mighty
Priam suffer them to give way to grief. In silence, therefore, they
heaped the bodies on the pile, grieving at heart. But when they had
burned them in the fire, they returned to sacred Ilium. In like manner
also, on the other side, the well-greaved Greeks heaped the bodies on
the pile, grieving in their heart; and having burned them with fire,
they returned to the hollow ships. And when it was not yet morning, but
still twilight, then a chosen band of Greeks arose about the pile; and
going out from the plain, they made around it one common tomb, and near
it they built a wall and lofty towers, a bulwark of their ships and of
themselves. In them they made well-fitted gates, that through them there
might be a passage for the chariots. Without they dug a deep ditch, near
it, broad and large, and in it fixed palisades. Thus the long-haired
Greeks on their part laboured.

But the gods on the contrary sitting beside the thundering Jove, were
admiring the mighty work of the brazen-mailed Greeks; but to them
Neptune, the earth-shaker, thus began to speak:

"O father Jove, is there any mortal on the boundless earth, who will any
more disclose his mind and counsel to the immortals? Dost thou not
perceive how the long-haired Greeks have built a wall before their
shipping, and have drawn a ditch all round, nor have they given splendid
hecatombs to the gods? The fame of this [work] will certainly be
wherever light is diffused: but they will forget that [wall] which I and
Phœbus Apollo, toiling, built round the city for the hero
Laomedon." [264]

Him, greatly enraged, the cloud-compelling Jove addressed:

"Ha! thou far-ruling earth-shaker, what hast thou said? Another of the
gods, who is much weaker than thou in hands and in might might have
dreaded this idea; but thy glory shall assuredly extend as far as light
is diffused. Howbeit, when the crest-waving Greeks shall have departed
with their ships into their dear fatherland, do thou, overthrowing this
wall, sink it all in the deep, and again cover the great shore with
sand. Thus may this mighty rampart of the Greeks be wholly effaced."

   [Footnote 264: Grote, Hist. p. 78, well observes that the
   "subsequent animosity of Neptune against Troy was greatly
   determined by the sentiment of the injustice of Laomedon." On the
   discrepancy between this passage and XXI. 442, see Müller, Dor.
   vol. i. p. 249]

Thus were they conversing on such matters among themselves. But the sun
had set, and the work of the Greeks was finished. They slaughtered oxen
through the tents, and took their repast. Many ships (which Euneüs, son
of Jason, whom Hypsipyle bore to Jason, shepherd of the people, sent,)
arrived from Lemnos, bringing wine. The son of Jason gave of wine a
thousand measures, to be brought separately, as a gift to the sons of
Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus. Thence the long-haired Greeks
bought[265] wine, some for brass, some for shining iron, others for
hides, some for the oxen themselves, and some for slaves; and they
prepared an abundant feast. Through the whole night, indeed, the
long-haired Greeks feasted; and the Trojans too, and their allies,
through the city. And all night thundering fearfully, provident Jove was
devising evils for both parties; but pale fear seized them. And they
poured wine from their cups on the earth, nor did any one dare to drink
before he had made a libation to the supreme son of Saturn. They then
lay down, and enjoyed the boon of sleep.

   [Footnote 265: Theophilus Jctus. iii. tit. xxiii. § 1. Καὶ τοῦτό
   ἐστι τὸ ἐν τῷ πλήθει θρυλλούμενον τῇ τῶν πραγμάτων ἐναλλαγῇ
   πρᾶσιν καὶ ἀγορασίαν συνίστασθαι, καὶ τοῦτο τὸ εῖδος πράσεως
   ἀρχαιότατον εἶναι. He then alleges these lines of Homer as the
   earliest known instance of barter.]




                           BOOK THE EIGHTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Jove assembles the gods, and forbids them to interfere between the
Greeks and Trojans. He then repairs to Ida, where, having consulted the
scales of destiny, he directs his lightning against the Greeks. Nestor,
in the chariot of Diomede, goes against Hector, whose charioteer is
slain by Diomede. Jove again interposes his thunders, and the Greeks
seek refuge within the rampart. Upon a favourable omen accompanying the
prayer of Agamemnon, Diomede and the rest set out, and Teucer performs
great exploits, but is disabled by Hector. Juno and Minerva are
prevented interfering by Jove, and Hector takes measures to insure the
safety of Troy during the night.


Now did saffron-mantled morn diffuse herself over all the earth, and
thunder-rejoicing Jove made an assembly of the gods on the highest peak
of many-topped Olympus. And he himself harangued them, and all the other
deities hearkened (to his command):[266]

"Hear me, all ye gods and all ye goddesses, that I may tell you what the
soul in my breast prompts me. Let no female deity, therefore, nor any
male, attempt to infringe this my injunction; but do ye all at once
assent, that I may very speedily bring these matters to their issue.
Whomsoever of the gods I shall discover, having gone apart from [the
rest], wishing to aid either the Trojans or the Greeks, disgracefully
smitten shall he return to Olympus: or seizing, I will hurl him into
gloomy Tartarus, very far hence, where there is a very deep gulf beneath
the earth, and iron portals, and a brazen threshold, as far below Hades
as heaven is from earth;[267] then shall he know by how much I am the
most powerful of all the gods. But come, ye gods, and try me, that ye
may all know. Having suspended a golden chain from heaven, do all ye
gods and goddesses suspend yourselves therefrom; yet would ye not draw
down from heaven to earth your supreme counsellor Jove, not even if ye
labour ever so much: but whenever I, desiring, should wish to pull it, I
could draw it up together, earth, and ocean, and all: then, indeed,
would I bind the chain around the top of Olympus, and all these should
hang aloft. By so much do I surpass both gods and men." [268]

   [Footnote 266: _I. e._ dii obsequtii sunt, ut convocati
   convenirent.--Heyne.]

   [Footnote 267: See the notes of Newton on Parad. Lost, i. 74.]

   [Footnote 268: Referring to this address of Jove, Coleridge
   remarks: "Although the supremacy of Jove comes far short of the
   true conception of almighty power, the characteristic point which
   seems to be fairly established is, that he is the active and
   ruling power of the popular mythology, the supreme and despotic
   chief of an aristocracy of weaker divinities, accustomed to
   consult with them and liable to their opposition and even
   violence, yet, upon the whole, substantially aristocratic, and
   independent of any recognized permanent superior."--Classic
   Poets, p. 159.]

Thus he said. But they all became mute in silence, wondering at his
speech; for he spoke very menacingly. But at length the azure-eyed
goddess Minerva thus spoke in the midst:

"O sire of ours! son of Saturn! most supreme of kings! well do we all
know that thy strength is irresistible: yet do we truly mourn for the
warlike Greeks, who are now perishing, fulfilling their evil fate. But
nevertheless, we will refrain from war, since thus thou commandest. Yet
will we suggest counsel to the Greeks, which will avail them, that they
may not all perish because thou art wrathful."

But her the cloud-impelling Jove smiling addressed: "Be of good cheer,
Tritonia, my dear daughter--I speak not with a serious intent; but I am
willing to be lenient towards thee."

Thus having said, under his chariot he yoked his brazen-footed,
swift-flying steeds, adorned with golden manes. He himself put on gold
about his person, and took his golden well-made whip, and ascended the
chariot; and lashed them on to proceed, and they, not unwilling, flew
midway between the earth and starry heaven. He came to spring-fed Ida,
the mother of wild beasts, to Gargarus, where he had a consecrated
enclosure, and a fragrant altar. There the father of gods and men
stopped his steeds, having loosed them from the chariot, and poured a
thick haze around. But he sat upon the summits, exulting in glory,
looking upon the city of the Trojans and the ships of the Greeks.

Meanwhile the long-haired Greeks were taking their repast in a hurried
manner through the tents, and after that they put on their armour. But
the Trojans, on the other side, were arming themselves through the city,
fewer in number; yet even thus, they were eager to fight in battle,
compelled by necessity, in defence of their children and their wives.
And the gates were opened wide, and the forces rushed out, both chariot
warriors and foot, and much tumult arose. But when these collecting
together came into one place, they clashed together shields and spears,
and the might of brazen-mailed men; but the bossy shields approached one
another, and much tumult arose. There at the same time were both
lamentation and boasting of men destroying and destroyed, and the earth
flowed with blood. As long as the forenoon lasted, and the sacred day
was in progress, so long did the weapons touch both, and the people
fell. But when the sun had ascended the middle heaven, then at length
did Father Jove raise the golden scales, and placed in them two
destinies of long-reposing death, [the destinies] both of the
horse-breaking Trojans and of the brazen-mailed Greeks, and holding them
in the middle, he poised them; but the fatal day of the Greeks inclined
low. The destinies of the Greeks, indeed, rested on the bounteous earth,
but those of the Trojans on the contrary were elevated to the wide
heaven.

But he himself mightily thundered from Ida, and sent his burning
lightning against the army of the Greeks: they having seen it, were
amazed, and pale fear seized them all. Then neither Idomeneus, nor
Agamemnon, nor the two Ajaces, the servants of Mars, dared to remain.
Gerenian Nestor alone, the guardian of the Greeks, remained, not
willingly, but one of his horses was disabled, which noble Alexander,
husband of fair-haired Helen, had pierced with an arrow in the top of
the forehead, where the forelocks of horses grow out of the head, and is
most fatal.[269] In torture he reared, for the arrow had entered the
brain; and he disordered the [other] horses, writhing round the brazen
barb. Whilst the old man hastening, was cutting away the side reins of
the horse with his sword, then were the swift steeds of Hector coming
through the crowd, bearing the bold charioteer Hector. And then the old
man would certainly have lost his life, if Diomede, brave in the din of
battle, had not quickly observed it; and he shouted, dreadfully
exhorting Ulysses, [thus]:

   [Footnote 269: Or "opportune" viz for inflicting a fatal
   wound.--Kennedy.]

"Jove-born son of Laërtes, much-contriving Ulysses, whither dost thou
fly, turning thy back in the throng, like a coward? [Beware], lest some
man with a spear transpierce thee in the back, flying. But stay, that we
may repel the fierce hero from the aged man."

Thus he spoke: but much-enduring, noble Ulysses heard him not, but
passed by to the hollow ships of the Greeks. But the son of Tydeus,
though being alone, was mixed with the van, and stood before the steeds
of the aged son of Neleus, and addressing him, spoke winged words:

"O old man, certainly the youthful warriors greatly oppress thee: but
thy strength is relaxed, and tiresome old age attends thee: thy servant
is exhausted, and thy steeds are slow. But come, ascend my chariot, that
thou mayest see what kind are the steeds of Tros, skilled to fly and to
pursue very rapidly, here and there, through the plain; which lately I
took from Æneas, authors of flight. Let the attendants take care of
those steeds [of thine], but let us direct these against the
horse-breaking Trojans, that even Hector may know whether my spear also
rages madly in my hands." Thus he said: but the Gerenian knight Nestor
disobeyed him not. Accordingly, at once their attendants, brave
Sthenelus and valorous Eurymedon, took care of Nestor's steeds: and the
two chiefs ascended the chariot of Diomede. Nestor took the shining
reins in his hands, and lashed the steeds, and soon they came near
Hector. At him rushing impetuously forward, the son of Tydeus launched a
spear; but the weapon missed him, and struck his attendant charioteer in
the breast, near the pap, who was holding the reins of the steeds,
Eniopeus, the son of magnanimous Thebæus: but he fell from the chariot,
and the swift steeds started back, and there his soul and his strength
were dissolved. But excessive grief overshadowed Hector in his mind, on
account of [the loss of] his charioteer. There, though grieving for his
companion, he let him lie, and sought a bold charioteer: nor did his
steeds long want a guide; for soon he found courageous Archeptolemus,
the son of Iphitus, whom then he made to mount the swift-footed steeds,
and gave the reins into his hands.

Then, indeed, had slaughter arisen, and dreadful deeds had been done,
and [the Trojans] had been pent up in Ilium like lambs, had not the
father of both men and gods quickly perceived it. Therefore, dreadfully
thundering he sent forth his glowing thunderbolt, and cast it into the
earth before the steeds of Diomede: but there arose a terrible flame of
burning sulphur, and the two frightened steeds crouched trembling
beneath the chariot. Moreover, the beautiful reins fell from the hands
of Nestor, and he feared in his soul, and addressed Diomede:

"Son of Tydeus, come now, turn thy solid-hoofed steeds to flight. Dost
thou not perceive that victory from Jove does not attend thee? For now,
this very day, of a truth, Saturnian Jove awards him glory; afterwards
again will he give it to us, if he shall be willing. By no means can a
man impede the will of Jove, not even a very mighty one; since he is by
far the most powerful."

But him Diomede, brave in the din of war, then answered: "Old man,
certainly thou hast said all this rightly: but this grievous sorrow
invades my heart and my soul: for Hector at some time will say,
haranguing amongst the Trojans, 'The son of Tydeus, routed by me, fled
to his ships.' Thus at some time will he boast: but then may the earth
yawn wide for me."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "Alas! warlike son of
Tydeus, what hast thou said? Even though Hector call thee coward and
unwarlike, yet the Trojans and Dardanians, and the wives of the
stout-hearted shield-bearing Trojans, whose vigorous husbands thou hast
prostrated in the dust, will not believe him."

Thus having said, he turned the solid-hoofed steeds to flight, back into
the crowd. But the Trojans and Hector, with a mighty shout, poured
destructive missiles upon them. And then after him loud roared mighty
crest-tossing Hector:

"Son of Tydeus, the swift-horsed Greeks honoured thee, indeed, above
[others] with a seat, with meat, and full cups; but now will they
dishonour thee; for thou hast become like a woman. Away! timorous girl!
since thou shalt never climb our towers, I giving way, nor bear away our
women in thy ships; first shall I give thee thy doom."

Thus he said; but the son of Tydeus debated whether to turn his steeds,
and to fight against him. Thrice, indeed, he thought in mind and soul,
but thrice, on the other hand, the provident Jove thundered from the
Idæan mountains, giving a signal to the Trojans, the alternating success
of battle. But Hector exhorted the Trojans, vociferating aloud:

"Ye Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my
friends, and be mindful of impetuous might! I know the son of Saturn
hath willingly accorded me victory and great renown, but to the Greeks
destruction. Fools, who indeed built those weak, worthless walls, which
shall not check my strength; but our steeds will easily overleap the dug
trench. But when, indeed, I come to their hollow ships, then let there
be some memory of burning fire, that I may consume their fleet with the
flame, and slay the Argives themselves at the ships, bewildered by the
smoke."

Thus having spoken, he cheered on his steeds, and said: "Xanthus, and
thou Podargus, and Æthon, and noble Lampus, now repay to me the
attention, with which, in great abundance, Andromache, the daughter of
magnanimous Eetion, gave to you the sweet barley, mixing wine also [for
you] to drink, whenever your mind ordered it, even before me, who boast
to be her vigorous husband. But follow and hasten, that we may take the
shield of Nestor, the fame of which has now reached the heaven, that it
is entirely golden, the handles and itself: but, from the shoulders of
horse-breaking Diomede, the well-made corslet, which the artist Vulcan
wrought. If we can take these, I expect that the Greeks this very night
will ascend their swift ships."

Thus he said boasting; but venerable Juno was indignant, and shook
herself on her throne, and made great Olympus tremble; and openly
accosted the mighty deity, Neptune:

"Alas! far-ruling Earth-shaker, dost thou not in thy soul pity the
perishing Greeks? But they bring thee many and grateful gifts to Helice
and Ægæ. Do thou, therefore, will to them the victory. For if we were
willing, as many of us as are assistants to the Greeks, to repulse the
Trojans and restrain far-sounding Jove, then might he grieve sitting
alone there on Ida."

But her king Neptune, greatly excited, thus addressed: "Juno,
petulant[270] in speech, what hast thou said? I would not wish, indeed,
that we, the other gods, should fight with Saturnian Jove, since he is
by far most powerful."

   [Footnote 270: Compare the phrase καθάπτεσθαι επεεσσιν.--Od. ii.
   240. Suidas: Απτοεπής' απτόητος εν τᾤ λέγειν. Apollon. Lex. p.
   188: "Απτωτε, ή απτόητε τοις λόγοις, ή καθαπτομενη δια των
   λόγων."]

Thus indeed were they holding such converse with each other. But
whatever space before the ships the trench belonging to the tower
enclosed, was filled with horses and shielded men crowded together.[271]
But Hector, the son of Priam, equal to swift Mars, had crowded them
thus, when Jupiter awarded him glory. And now would he have burned the
equal ships with blazing fire, had not venerable Juno put it into the
soul of Agamemnon, himself actively engaged, briskly to urge on the
Greeks. He therefore hastened to go along the tents and ships of the
Greeks, holding in his stout hand his great purple robe. But in the huge
black ship of Ulysses he stood, which was in the midst, that he might
shout audibly to either side, as well to the tent of Telamonian Ajax, as
to that of Achilles, for they had drawn up their equal ships at the
extremities of the line, relying on their valour and the strength of
their hands. Then he shouted distinctly, calling upon the Greeks:

"Shame! ye Greeks, foul subjects of disgrace! gallant in form [alone]!
Where are those boastings gone, when we professed ourselves the bravest;
those which, once in Lemnos, vain braggarts! ye did utter, eating much
flesh of horned oxen, and drinking-goblets crowned with wine,[272] that
each would in battle be equivalent to a hundred and even two hundred of
the Trojans? But now, indeed, we are not equal to Hector alone, who
shortly will burn our ships with flaming fire. O father Jove, hast thou
indeed ever yet afflicted with such destruction any one of mighty kings,
and so deprived him of high renown? And yet I say that I never passed by
thy fair altar in my many-benched ship, coming here with ill luck.[273]
But on all I burned the fat of oxen and the thighs, desiring to sack
well-walled Troy. But, O Jove, accomplish for me this vow, at least
permit us to escape and get away; nor suffer the Greeks to be thus
subdued by the Trojans."

   [Footnote 271: Observe that των belongs to ίππων and ανδρών, and
   that όσον εκ νηών από πύργου τάφρος εεργε, means that "the space
   between the rampart and the sea was enclosed." Από does not
   govern πυργου, but is compounded with εεργε.]

   [Footnote 272: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 292, sqq. who has, however,
   been long since anticipated by Paschal. de Coron. i. 4.]

   [Footnote 273: Schol. Έρρων, επί φθορ παοαγενόμενος. See Alberti
   on Hesych, s. v. t. i. p. 1445. So, also, Apollon. p. 364: Έπΐ
   φθορᾴ πορενόμενος.]

Thus he said: and the Sire[274] pitied him weeping, and granted to him
that the army should be safe, and not perish. And forthwith he sent an
eagle, the most perfect[275] of birds, holding a fawn in his talons, the
offspring of a swift deer: and near the very beauteous altar of Jove he
cast down the fawn, where the Greeks were sacrificing to Panomphæan[276]
Jove.

When, therefore, they saw that the bird had come from Jove, they rushed
the more against the Trojans, and were mindful of battle. Then none of
the Greeks, numerous as they were, could have boasted that he had driven
his swift steeds before Diomede, and urged them beyond the ditch, and
fought against [the enemy]; for far the first he slew a helmeted Trojan
hero, Agelaus, son of Phradmon. He, indeed, was turning his horses for
flight; but as he was turning, Diomede fixed his spear in his back,
between his shoulders, and drove it through his breast. He fell from his
chariot, and his arms rattled upon him. After him the sons of Atreus,
Agamemnon and Menelaus; after them the Ajaces, clad in impetuous valour;
after them, Idomeneus and Meriones, the armour-bearer of Idomeneus,
equal to man-slaughtering Mars; and after them Eurypylus, the
illustrious son of Evæmon. Teucer came the ninth, stretching his
bent[277] bow, and stood under the shield of Telamonian Ajax. Then Ajax,
indeed, kept moving the shield aside, and the hero looking around, when
shooting, he had hit any one in the crowd, the one[278] falling there,
lost his life. But he[279] retiring like a child to his mother,
sheltered himself beneath Ajax, and he covered him with his splendid
shield. Then what Trojan first did blameless Teucer slay? Orsilochus
first, and Ormenus, and Ophelestes, and Dætor, and Chromius, and godlike
Lycophontes, and Amopaon, son of Polyæmon, and Melanippus--all, one
after the other, he stretched upon the bounteous earth. But Agamemnon,
king of men, rejoiced at seeing him destroying the phalanxes of the
Trojans with his stout bow. And advancing near him he stood, and thus
addressed him:

   [Footnote 274: See my note on Æsch. Prom. p. 3, n. 3, ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 275: _I. e_. with reference to augury. Hesych. p.
   1360, explains it by επιτελεστικώτατον (see Alberti). The eagle
   is said to have foretold Jove's own sovereignty, and hence to
   have been placed among the constellations. Cf. Hygin. Poet. Astr.
   ii. 16; Eratosthen. Catast. 30; Serv. on Æn. ix. 564.]

   [Footnote 276: So called, as being the author of all augury.]

   [Footnote 277: _I. e_. prepared for action.]

   [Footnote 278: _I. e_. the wounded man.]

   [Footnote 279: Teucer.]

"Teucer, beloved one, son of Telamon, ruler of forces, shoot thus, if
perchance thou mayest become a light[280] to the Greeks, and to thy
father Telamon, who brought thee up carefully, being a little one, and
treated thee with care in his palace, though being a spurious son. Him,
though far away, do thou exalt with glory. But I will declare to thee,
as it shall be brought to pass, if ægis-bearing Jove and Minerva shall
grant me to sack the well-built city of Ilium, next to myself I will
place an honourable reward in thy hands, either a tripod, or two steeds
with their chariot, or some fair one, who may ascend the same couch with
thee."

   [Footnote 280: See on vi. 6.]

But him blameless Teucer answering, addressed: "Most glorious son of
Atreus, why dost thou urge on me hastening; nor, as far as I have any
strength, do I loiter: but from the time we have driven the Trojans
towards Ilium, since that period have I slain men, intercepting them
with my shafts. Already have I discharged eight long-bearded arrows, and
they have all been fixed in the bodies of warlike youths; but I cannot
strike this raging dog."

He said; and another arrow from the string he shot right against Hector,
for his mind was eager to strike him; and him indeed he missed: but in
the breast he struck blameless Gorgythion with an arrow, the brave son
of Priam. Him his fair mother Castianira, like unto a goddess in person,
brought forth, being wedded from Æsyma. And as a poppy, which in the
garden is weighed down with fruit and vernal showers, droops its head to
one side, so did his head incline aside, depressed by the helmet. But
Teucer discharged another arrow from the string against Hector, for his
mind longed to strike him. Yet even then he missed, for Apollo warded
off the shaft: but he struck in the breast, near the pap, Archeptolemus,
the bold charioteer of Hector, rushing to battle: and he fell from his
chariot, and his swift steeds sprang back. There his soul and strength
were dissolved. But sad grief darkened the mind of Hector, on account of
his charioteer. Then indeed he left him, although grieved for his
companion, and ordered his brother Cebriones, being near, to take the
reins of the steeds; but he was not disobedient, having heard him. Then
[Hector] himself leaped from his all-shining chariot to the ground,
roaring dreadfully: and he seized a large stone in his hand, and went
straight against Teucer, for his mind encouraged him to strike him. He
on his part took out a bitter arrow from his quiver, and applied it to
the string: but him, on the other hand, near the shoulder, where the
collar-bone separates the neck and breast, and it is a particularly
fatal spot, there, as he was drawing back [the bow], the active warrior
Hector[281] with a rugged stone struck him earnestly rushing against
him. He broke his bowstring, and his hand was numbed at the wrist-joint.
Falling on his knees he stood, and the bow dropped from his hands. But
Ajax did not neglect his fallen brother; for running up, he protected
him, and stretched his shield before him. Afterwards his two dear
companions, Mecistheus, son of Echius, and noble Alastor, coming up,
carried him, groaning heavily, to the hollow ships.

   [Footnote 281: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 64.]

But again did Olympian Jove rouse the strength of the Trojans; and they
drove back the Greeks straight to the deep foss. But Hector went in the
van, looking grim through ferocity; as when some dog, relying on his
swift feet, seizes from the rear a wild boar or lion on the haunch and
buttocks, and marks him as he turns: so Hector hung on the rear of the
long-haired Greeks, always slaying the hindmost: and they fled. But when
they flying had passed through the stakes and the foss, and many were
subdued beneath the hands of the Trojans, they, on the one hand,
remaining at the ships were restrained, and having exhorted one another,
and raised their hands to all the gods, they prayed each with a loud
voice. But, on the other hand, Hector, having the eyes of a Gorgon, or
of man-slaughtering Mars, drove round his beauteous-maned steeds in all
directions.

But them [the Greeks] white-armed goddess Juno having beheld, pitied
them, and thus straightway to Minerva addressed winged words:

"Alas! daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, shall we no longer be anxious
about the perishing Greeks, although in extremity;--who now, indeed,
fulfilling evil fate, are perishing by the violence of one man? for
Hector, the son of Priam, rages, no longer to be endured, and already
has he done many evils."

But her the azure-eyed goddess Minerva in turn addressed: "And beyond
doubt this warrior would have lost his vigour and his life, destroyed by
the hands of the Greeks in his fatherland, were it not that this my sire
rages with no sound mind; cruel, ever unjust, a counteractor of my
efforts. Nor does he remember aught of my services, that I have very
often preserved his son, when oppressed by the labours of Eurystheus. He
truly wept to heaven; but me Jove sent down from heaven to aid him. But
had I known this in my prudent[282] mind, when he sent me to [the
dwelling] of the gaoler Pluto to drag from Erebus the dog of hateful
Pluto, he had not escaped the profound stream of the Stygian wave. But
now, indeed, he hates me, and prefers the wish of Thetis, who kissed his
knees, and took his beard in her hand, beseeching him to honour
city-destroying Achilles, The time will be when he will again call me
his dear Minerva. But do thou now harness for us thy solid-hoofed
steeds, while I, having entered the palace of ægis-bearing Jove, equip
myself with arms for war, that I may see whether crest-tossing Hector,
the son of Priam, will rejoice at us, as I appear in the walks[283] of
war. Certainly also some one of the Trojans will satiate the dogs and
birds with his fat and flesh, having fallen at the ships of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 282: The Scholiast, and Apollon. Lex. p. 658, interpret
   πευκαλίμσι, πικραΐς και δυνεταἴς. Perhaps "sharp devising" would
   be the best translation.]

   [Footnote 283: Literally, "bridges," _i. e._ the open spaces
   between the different battalions.]

Thus she said: nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey her. Juno,
on her part, venerable goddess, daughter of mighty Saturn, running in
haste, caparisoned the golden-bridled steeds. But Minerva, the daughter
of ægis-bearing Jove, let fall upon the pavement of her father her
beauteous variegated robe, which she had wrought and laboured with her
own hands. But she, having put on the coat of mail of cloud-compelling
Jove, was equipped in armour for the tearful war. She mounted her
flaming chariot on her feet, and took her heavy, huge, sturdy spear,
with which she is wont to subdue the ranks of heroic men, with
whomsoever she, sprung from a powerful sire, is enraged. But Juno with
the lash speedily urged on the steeds. The portals of heaven opened
spontaneously, which the Hours[284] guarded, to whom are intrusted the
great heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud, or to close
it. Then through these they guided their goaded steeds.

   [Footnote 284: Hence the Hours also possess the office of tending
   and harnessing the horses of the sun, as is shown by Dausq. on
   Quint. Calab. i. p. 9.]

But father Jove, when he beheld them from Ida, was grievously enraged,
and roused golden-winged Iris to bear this message:

"Away, depart, swift Iris, turn them back, nor suffer them to come
against me; for we shall not advantageously engage in battle. For thus I
speak, and it shall moreover be accomplished, I will lame their swift
steeds under their chariot, dislodge them from the chariot, and break
the chariot; nor for ten revolving years shall ye be healed of the
wounds which the thunderbolt shall inflict: that Minerva may know when
she may be fighting with her sire. But with Juno I am neither so
indignant nor so angry; for she is ever accustomed to counteract me, in
whatever I intend."

Thus he said: but Iris, swift as the storm, hastened to bear the
message. Down from the Idsean mountains she went to great Olympus:
meeting them in the foremost gates of many-valleyed Olympus, she
restrained them, and pronounced to them the message of Jove:

"Where do ye go? Why does your soul rage in your breasts? The sun of
Saturn does not suffer you to aid the Greeks. For thus has the son of
Saturn threatened, and he will assuredly perform it, to lame your swift
steeds under your chariot, and dislodge yourselves from the chariot, and
break the chariot; nor for ten revolving years shall ye be healed of the
wounds which his thunderbolt shall inflict: that thou, O Azure-eyed,
mayest know when thou art fighting with thy sire. But with Juno he is
neither so indignant nor so angry; for she is always accustomed to
counteract him in whatever he devises. But thou, most insolent and
audacious hound! if thou in reality shalt dare to raise thy mighty spear
against Jove--" [285]

   [Footnote 285: Observe the aposiopesis.]

Thus indeed having said, swift-footed Iris departed. Then Juno addressed
these words to Minerva:

"Alas! daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, I cannot any longer suffer that we
ourselves shall fight against Jove, on account of mortals. Of whom let
one perish, and let another live, whoever may chance. But let him,
meditating his own affairs in his mind, adjudicate to the Trojans and
the Greeks as is fair."

Thus then having said, she turned back the solid-hoofed steeds. The
Hours unyoked for them the fair-maned steeds, and bound them to the
ambrosial mangers; but they tilted the chariots against the splendid
walls. But they themselves sat, mingled with the other deities, on their
golden couches, sad at heart.

Then father Jove drove his beauteous-wheeled chariot and steeds from Ida
to Olympus, and came to the seats of the gods. His horses, indeed, the
illustrious Earth-shaker loosed, but he laid the chariot on its support,
spreading a linen coverlet [over it]. But loud-sounding Jove himself sat
on his golden throne, and mighty Olympus was shaken under his feet. But
Minerva and Juno by themselves sat apart from Jove, nor did they at all
address him, nor question him. But he knew in his mind, and said:

"Why are ye so sad, Minerva and Juno? Indeed, ye have not laboured long
in glorious battle to destroy the Trojans, against whom ye have taken
grievous hatred. Not all the gods in Olympus could altogether turn me to
flight, such are my strength and my invincible hands. But trembling
seized the shining limbs of both of you, before ye saw battle, and the
destructive deeds of war. For so I tell you, which would also have been
performed: no more should ye, stricken with my thunder, have returned in
your chariots to Olympus, where are the seats of the immortals."

Thus he said: but Minerva and Juno murmured. They sat near each other,
and were devising evils for the Trojans.

Minerva, indeed, was silent, nor said anything, angry with father Jove,
for wild rage possessed her. But Juno contained not her wrath in her
breast, but addressed him:

"Most terrible son of Saturn, what hast thou said? Well do we know that
thy might is invincible: yet do we lament the warlike Greeks, who will
now perish, fulfilling their evil destiny. But nevertheless, we will
desist from war, if thou desirest it. But we will suggest counsel to the
Greeks, which will avail them, that they may not all perish, thou being
wrathful."

But her cloud-compelling Jove answering, addressed: "To-morrow, if thou
wilt, O venerable, large-eyed Juno, thou shalt behold the very powerful
son of Saturn even with greater havoc destroying the mighty army of the
warlike Greeks. For warlike Hector will not cease from battle before
that he arouse the swift-footed son of Peleus at the ships. On that day,
when they indeed are fighting at the ships, in a very narrow pass, for
Patroclus fallen. For thus is it fated. But I do not make account of
thee enraged, not if thou shouldst go to the furthest limits of land and
ocean, where Iapetus and Saturn sitting, are delighted neither with the
splendour of the sun that journeys on high, nor with the winds; but
profound Tartarus [is] all around--not even if wandering, thou shouldst
go there, have I regard for thee enraged, since there is nothing more
impudent than thou."

Thus he said: but white-armed Juno answered nought. And the bright light
of the sun fell into the ocean, drawing dark night over the fruitful
earth.[286] The light set to the Trojans indeed unwilling; but gloomy
and much-desired light came on, grateful to the Greeks.

   [Footnote 286: Beautifully expressed by Ennius apud Macrob. Sat.
   vi. 4: "Interea fax Occidit, Oceanumque rubra tractim obruit
   æthra." See Columna on Εnn. p. 113, ed. Hessel.]

But illustrious Hector then formed a council of the Trojans, having led
them apart from the ships, at the eddying river, in a clear space, where
the place appeared free from dead bodies. But alighting to the ground
from their horses, they listened to the speech which Hector, beloved of
Jove, uttered. In his hand he held a spear of eleven cubits: and before
him shone the golden point of the spear, and a golden ring surrounded
it. Leaning on this, he spoke winged words:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, and Dardanians, and allies: I lately thought that
having destroyed the ships and all the Greeks, I should return back to
wind-swept Ilium. But darkness has come on first, which has now been
the chief means of preserving the Greeks and their ships on the shore of
the sea. But, however, let us now obey dark night, and make ready our
repasts; and do ye loose from your chariots your beautiful-maned steeds,
and set fodder before them: and quickly bring from the city oxen and fat
sheep; bring sweet wine and bread from your homes; and besides collect
many fagots, that all night till Aurora, mother of dawn, we may kindle
many fires, and the splendour may ascend to heaven: lest haply in the
night the long-haired Greeks attempt to fly over the broad ridge of the
ocean. That they may not at all events without toil and without harm
ascend their ships: but [let us] take care that each of them may have to
heal a wound[287] at home, being stricken either with an arrow, or with
a sharp spear, bounding into his ship; that every other too may dread to
wage tearful war against the horse-breaking Trojans. Let the heralds,
dear to Jove, proclaim through the city, that the youths at the age of
puberty, and the hoary-templed sages, keep watch around the city, in the
god-built turrets; and let the females also, the feebler sex, in their
halls each kindle a mighty fire: and let there be some strong guard,
lest a secret band enter the city, the people being absent. Thus let it
be, magnanimous Trojans, as I say: and let the speech, which is now most
salutary, be thus spoken. But for that which will be [most expedient] in
the morning, I will [then] speak amongst the horse-breaking Trojans.
Making vows both to Jove and to the other gods, I hope to banish hence
those dogs borne hither by the fates, whom the fates bear in their black
ships.[288] But let us keep watch during the night, and in the morning,
at dawn, equipped with arms, let us stir up sharp conflict at the hollow
ships. I will see whether valiant Diomede, the son of Tydeus, will force
me back from the ships to our walls, or whether I shall bear away his
bloody spoils, having slain him with my brazen spear. To-morrow shall he
make manifest his valour, if he shall withstand my assaulting spear. But
I think that he will lie wounded amongst the first at sunrise to-morrow,
and many companions around him. Would that I were so certainly immortal,
and free from old age all my days, and honoured, as Minerva and Apollo
are honoured, as [I am certain] that this day will bring evil upon the
Greeks."

   [Footnote 287: Literally, "digest a weapon," _i.e._ have a wound
    to attend to. So _telum_ and _vulnus_ are used for each other
   in Latin.]

   [Footnote 288: Surely this line is a gloss upon κηρεσσιφορητους.]

Thus Hector harangued them; but the Trojans applauded aloud. And they
loosed from the yoke their sweating steeds, and bound them with halters,
each to his own chariot. Quickly they brought from the city oxen and fat
sheep: and they brought sweet wine, and bread from their homes, and also
collected many fagots. But the winds raised the savour from the plain to
heaven.

But they, greatly elated, sat all night in the ranks of war, and many
fires blazed for them. As when in heaven the stars appear very
conspicuous[289] around the lucid moon, when the æther is wont to be
without a breeze, and all the pointed rocks and lofty summits and groves
appear, but in heaven the immense æther is disclosed, and all the stars
are seen, and the shepherd rejoices in his soul. Thus did many fires of
the Trojans kindling them appear before Ilium, between the ships and the
streams of Xanthus. A thousand fires blazed in the plain, and by each
sat fifty men, at the light of the blazing fire. But their steeds eating
white barley and oats, standing by the chariots, awaited
beautiful-throned Aurora.

   [Footnote 289: Cf. Æsch. Ag. 6: Λαμπρούς δυνάστας, ἐμπρεποντας
   αίθέρι.]




                            BOOK THE NINTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

By advice of Nestor, Agamemnon sends Ulysses, Phœnix, and Ajax, to the
tent of Achilles to sue for a reconciliation. Notwithstanding the
earnest appeal of Phœnix, their errand proves fruitless.


Thus the Trojans indeed kept guard: but a mighty[290] Flight, the
companion of chill Fear, seized upon the Greeks; and all the chiefs were
afflicted with intolerable grief. And as two winds, the north and south,
which both blow from Thrace,[291] rouse the fishy deep, coming suddenly
[upon it]; but the black billows are elevated together; and they dash
much sea-weed out of the ocean; so was the mind of the Greeks distracted
within their bosoms.

   [Footnote 290: "In Il. 1,2, the θεσπεσίη φυζα of the Achæans is
   not to be explained as a supernatural flight, occasioned by the
   gods. It is a great and general flight, caused by Hector and the
   Trojans. For although this was approved of and encouraged by
   Jupiter, yet his was only that mediate influence of the deity
   without which in general nothing took place in the Homeric
   battles."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 358. Cf. Coleridge, p. 160.]

   [Footnote 291: Wood, p. 46, explains this from the situation of
   Ionia. Heyne, however, observes, "comparatio e mente poetæ
   instituitur, non ex Agamemnonis persona."]

But Atrides, wounded to the heart with great sorrow, kept going round,
giving orders to the clear-voiced heralds, to summon each man by name to
an assembly, but not to call aloud; and he himself toiled among the
first. And they sat in council, grieved, and Agamemnon arose, shedding
tears, like a black-water fountain, which pours its gloomy stream from a
lofty rock. Thus he, deeply sighing, spoke words to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders and chieftains over the Greeks, Jove, the son of
Saturn, has greatly entangled me in a grievous calamity: cruel, who once
promised me, and assented, that I should return, having destroyed
well-built Ilium. But now has he plotted an evil fraud, and orders me to
return inglorious to Argos, after I have lost much people. Thus,
doubtless, will it be agreeable to almighty Jove, who has already
overthrown the heights of many cities, and will still overthrow them,
for his power is greatest. But come, let us all obey as I advise: let us
fly with the ships to our dear fatherland, for now we shall not take
wide-wayed Troy."

Thus he spoke; but they were all still in silence, and the sons of the
Greeks being sad, kept silent long: at length Diomede, brave in the din
of battle, spoke:

"Son of Atreus, thee will I first oppose, speaking inconsiderately, as
is lawful, in the assembly; but be not thou the least offended. First
among the Greeks didst thou disparage my valour, saying that I was
unwarlike and weak;[292] and all this, as well the young as the old of
the Greeks know. One of two things hath the son of crafty Saturn given
thee: he has granted that thou shouldst be honoured by the sceptre above
all; but valour hath he not given thee, which is the greatest strength.
Strange man, dost thou then certainly think that the sons of the Greeks
are unwarlike and weak, as thou sayest? If indeed thy mind impels thee,
that thou shouldst return, go: the way lies open to thee, and thy ships
stand near the sea, which very many followed thee from Mycenæ. But the
other long-haired Greeks will remain until we overthrow Troy: but if
they also [choose], let them fly with their ships to their dear
fatherland. But we twain, I and Sthenelus,[293] will fight, until we
find an end of Troy; for under the auspices of the deity we came."

   [Footnote 292: Cf. iv. 370, sqq.]

   [Footnote 293: Heyne compares Julius Cæsar, Com. B. G. i. 40. "Si
   præterea nemo sequatur (contra Ariovistum), tamen se cum sola
   decima legione iturum dicit."]

Thus he spoke; but all the sons of the Greeks applauded, admiring the
speech of steed-breaking Diomede. But them the knight Nestor, rising up,
addressed:

"Son of Tydeus, pre-eminently indeed art thou brave in battle, and the
best in council amongst all thine equals. No one has censured thy
discourse, nor contradicts it, as many as are the Greeks; but thou
comest not to an end of discussion.[294] Assuredly thou art youthful,
and mightst be my youngest son for age, yet thou speakest prudent words
to the kings of the Greeks, for thou hast said aright. But come, I who
boast to be older than thou, will speak out, and discuss everything: nor
will any one, not even king Agamemnon, disregard my speech. Tribeless,
lawless, homeless is he, who loves horrid civil war. But now, however,
let us obey dark night, and make ready suppers. But let the respective
guards lie down beside the trench, dug without the wall. To the youth,
indeed, I enjoin these things; but next, Atrides, do thou begin, for
thou art supreme. Give a banquet to the elders; it becomes thee, and is
not unseemly. Full are thy tents of wine, which the ships of the Greeks
daily bring over the wide sea from Thrace. Thou hast every
accommodation, and rulest over many people. But when many are assembled,
do thou obey him who shall give the best advice; for there is great need
of good and prudent [advice] to all the Greeks, since the enemy are
burning many fires near the ships; and who can rejoice at these things?
But this night will either ruin the army or preserve it."

   [Footnote 294: _I. e_. thou hast not said all that might have
   been said on the subject.]

Thus he spoke; and they heard him very attentively, and obeyed. But the
guards rushed forth with their arms, [those around] Thrasymedes, the son
of Nestor, the shepherd of the people, Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of
Mars, Meriones, Aphareus, and Deïpyrus, as well as the son of Creon,
noble Lycomedes. There were seven leaders of the guards, and a hundred
youths marched along with each, holding long spears in their hands.
Proceeding to the space between the trench and the wall, there they sat
down, and there kindled a fire, and prepared each his supper.

But Atrides conducted the assembled elders of the Greeks to his tent,
and set before them a strength-recruiting banquet; and they laid their
hands upon the viands placed before them. But when they had dismissed
the desire of eating and drinking, to them first of all did aged Nestor,
whose advice had previously appeared best, begin to interweave advice;
who wisely counselling, addressed them, and said:

"Most glorious Atrides, king of men, Agamemnon, with thee shall I end,
and with thee shall I commence. Since thou art a king of many nations,
and Jove hath placed in thine hands both a sceptre and laws, that thou
mayest consult for their advantage. Therefore is it necessary that thou
in particular shouldst deliver and hear an opinion, and also accomplish
that of another, when his mind urges any one to speak for the [public]
good; but on thee will depend whatever takes the lead. Yet will I speak
as appears to me to be best. For no other person will propound a better
opinion than that which I meditate, both of old and also now, from that
period when thou, O nobly born, didst depart, carrying off the maid
Briseïs from the tent of the enraged Achilles; by no means according to
my judgment; for I very strenuously dissuaded thee from it: but having
yielded to thy haughty temper, thou didst dishonour the bravest hero,
whom even the immortals have honoured; for, taking away his reward, thou
still retainest it. Yet even now let us deliberate how we may succeed in
persuading him, appeasing him with agreeable gifts and soothing words."

But him the king of men, Agamemnon, again addressed: "Old man, thou hast
not falsely enumerated my errors. I have erred, nor do I myself deny it.
That man indeed is equivalent to many troops, whom Jove loves in his
heart, as now he hath honoured this man, and subdued the people of the
Greeks. But since I erred, having yielded to my wayward disposition, I
desire again to appease him, and to give him invaluable presents. Before
you all will I enumerate the distinguished gifts: seven tripods
untouched by fire,[295] and ten talents of gold, and twenty shining
caldrons, and twelve stout steeds, victorious in the race, which have
borne off prizes by their feet. No pauper would the man be, nor in want
of precious gold, to whom as many prizes belong as [these] solid-hoofed
steeds have brought to me. I will likewise give seven beautiful Lesbian
women, skilful in faultless works; whom I selected when he himself took
well-inhabited Lesbos, who excel the race of women in beauty. These will
I give him, and amongst them will be her whom then I took away, the
daughter of Briseïs; and I will swear moreover a mighty oath, that I
never ascended her bed, nor embraced her, as is the custom of human
beings--of men and women. All these shall immediately be ready; and if,
moreover, the gods grant that we destroy the great city of Priam, let
him fill his ships abundantly with gold and brass, entering in when we
the Greeks divide the spoil. Let him also choose twenty Trojan women,
who may be fairest next to Argive Helen. But if we reach Achæan Argos,
the udder of the land,[296] he may become my son-in-law; and I will
honour him equally with Orestes, who is nurtured as my darling son, in
great affluence. Now, I have three daughters in my well-built
palace,--Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa. Of these let him lead
the beloved one, whichsoever he may choose, without marriage-dower, to
the house of Peleus; but I will give very many dowries, so many as no
man ever yet gave to his daughter. I will, moreover, give him seven
well-inhabited cities,--Cardamyle, Enope, and grassy Ira, glorious
Pheræ, with deep-pastured Anthea, fair Æpeia, and vine-bearing Pedasus;
which are all near the sea, the last towards sandy Pylus. But in them
dwell men rich in flocks and herds, who will honour him like a god with
gifts, and beneath his sceptre will pay rich tributes. These will I
bestow upon him, ceasing from his anger. Let him be prevailed upon.
Pluto indeed is implacable and inexorable, wherefore he is the most
hateful of all the gods to men. Let him likewise yield to me, inasmuch
as I am more kingly, and because I boast to be older [than he]."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "Most glorious son of
Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, thou indeed offerest gifts by no means
despicable to king Achilles. But come, let us urge chosen men, who may
go with all speed to the tent of Achilles, the son of Peleus. Come then,
these will I select, but let them obey. First of all indeed let Phœnix,
dear to Jove, be the leader; next then mighty Ajax and divine Ulysses:
and of the heralds, let Hodius and Eurybates follow with them. But bring
water for the hands, and command to observe well-omened words,[297] that
we may supplicate Saturnian Jove, if perchance he will take pity."

   [Footnote 295: _I. e_. not yet brought into common use.]

   [Footnote 296: A beautiful expression, denoting the fertility of
   the land. Cf. Albert. on Hesych. t. ii. p. 806. So νησοιο μαστός
   in Callim. II. in Del. 48.]

   [Footnote 297: The translation, "favour us with their voices," is
   nonsense, while "keep silence" is by no means the meaning of
   εύφημήσαι. Kennedy rightly explains it, "abstain from expressions
   unsuitable to the solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending
   the god, might defeat the object of their supplications." See
   Servius on Virg. Æn. v. 71; Lamb, on Hor. Od. iii. 1, 2;
   Broukhus. on Tibull. ii. 1, 1.]

Thus he spoke, and delivered an opinion agreeable to them all.
Immediately indeed the heralds poured water upon their hands, and the
youths crowned the goblets with wine; then they distributed them to all,
having poured the first of the wine into the cups. But when they had
made libations, and drunk as much as their mind desired, they hastened
from the tent of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. To them the Gerenian
knight Nestor gave many charges, looking wistfully upon each,
particularly upon Ulysses, that they should endeavour to persuade the
blameless son of Peleus.

They twain then went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, praying
earnestly to earth-shaking [Neptune], who encompasses the earth, that
they might easily persuade the great mind of the grandson of Æacus. But
they came to the tents and ships of the Myrmidons, and they found him
delighting his soul with his clear-toned harp, beautiful, curiously
wrought, and upon it was a silver comb. This he had taken from amongst
the spoils, having destroyed the city of Eëtion, and with it he was
delighting his soul, and singing the glorious deeds[298] of heroes.
Patroclus alone sat opposite to him in silence, waiting upon the
descendant of Æacus when he should cease to sing. Then they advanced
farther, and divine Ulysses preceded; and they stood before him; whilst
Achilles, astonished, leaped up, with his lyre, quitting the seat where
he had been sitting. In like manner Patroclus, when he beheld the
heroes, arose, and swift-footed Achilles taking them by the hand,
addressed them:

"Hail, warriors, ye indeed have come as friends. Surely [there is] some
great necessity [when ye come], who are to me, although enraged, dearest
of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 298: Or the renown of heroes. So Apollon. i. 1:
   Παλαιγενεων κλεα φώτων Μνησομαι.]

Thus having spoken, divine Achilles led them forward, and seated them
upon couches and purple coverlets; then straightway he addressed
Patroclus, who was near:

"Place a larger goblet, O son of Menœtius, mix purer wine,[299] and
prepare a cup for each, for men most dear [to me] are beneath my roof."

   [Footnote 299: _I. e_. less diluted than usual. On this quaint
   picture of ancient manners, compared with the customs of the
   Hebrew fathers, compare Coleridge, p. 151.]

Thus he spoke; and Patroclus obeyed his dear companion. But he
[Achilles] placed in the flame of the fire a large dressing-block, and
upon it he laid the chine of a sheep and of a fat goat, with the back of
a fatted sow, abounding in fat. Automedon then held them for him, and
noble Achilles cut them up; and divided them skilfully into small
pieces, and transfixed them with spits; whilst the son of Menœtius, a
godlike hero, kindled a large fire. But when the fire had burned away,
and the flame grew languid, strewing the embers, he extended the spits
over them, and sprinkled them with sacred salt, raising them up from the
racks. But when he had dressed them, and had thrown them upon kitchen
tables, Patroclus, taking bread, served it out upon the board in
beautiful baskets: but Achilles distributed the flesh. But he himself
sat opposite to noble Ulysses, against the other wall, and ordered
Patroclus, his companion, to sacrifice to the gods; and he accordingly
cast the first morsels[300] into the fire. And they stretched forth
their hands to the prepared viands which lay before them. But when they
had dismissed the desire of eating and drinking, Ajax nodded to Phoenix,
but noble Ulysses observed it, and having filled his goblet with wine,
he pledged Achilles:

   [Footnote 300: Hesych. and Phrynicus (for their glosses should
   probably be joined), θνηλάς' άπαρχάς των τεθυμἑνων.]

"Health, Achilles. We are not wanting of a complete feast, either in the
tent of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, or even here also, for many
strength-recruiting dainties are here; but the business of an agreeable
feast is not our care. We, O thou Jove-nurtured one, contemplating it,
rather dread a very great disaster, as it is matter of doubt whether the
well-benched ships be saved or destroyed, unless thou puttest on thy
might. For near the ships and the wall the high-minded Trojans and their
far-summoned allies have pitched their camp, kindling many fires
throughout the host; and they say that they will no longer restrain
themselves, but that they will fall upon our black vessels.[301] And
Saturnian Jove exhibiting to them propitious signs, darts his lightning;
and Hector, looking fiercely round in valour, rages terribly, trusting
in Jove, nor reverences at all either men or gods, but great madness
hath come upon him. He prays that divine morn may speedily come. For he
declares that he will cut off the poop-ends[302] of the ships, and burn
[the ships] themselves with ravaging fire, and slaughter the Greeks
beside them, discomforted by the smoke. Wherefore do I greatly fear in
my mind lest the gods may fulfil his threats, and it be destined for us
to perish in Troy, far from steed-nourishing Argos. Rise then, if thou
hast the intention, although late, to defend the harassed sons of the
Greeks from the violent onslaught of the Trojans. To thyself it will
hereafter be a cause of sorrow, nor is it possible in any manner to
discover a remedy for a disaster when received; wherefore reflect much
beforehand, how thou mayest avert the evil day from the Greeks. O my
friend, surely thy father Peleus charged thee, on that day when he sent
thee from Phthia to Agamemnon, 'My son, Minerva and Juno will bestow
valour, if they choose; but restrain thy great-hearted soul within thy
breast, because humanity is better; and abstain from injurious
contention, that both the youth and elders of the Greeks may honour thee
the more.' Thus did the old man give charge, but thou art forgetful. Yet
even now desist, and lay aside thy mind-corroding wrath. To thee
Agamemnon gives worthy gifts, ceasing from indignation. But if [thou
wilt] hear from me, and I will repeat to thee how many presents
Agamemnon in his tents hath promised thee: seven tripods, untouched by
the fire, and ten talents of gold, twenty shining caldrons, and twelve
stout steeds, victorious in the race, which have borne off prizes by
their feet. No pauper, nor in want of precious gold, would that man be
to whom so many prizes belonged as the steeds of Agamemnon have borne
off by their fleetness. He will likewise give seven beautiful women,
skilful in faultless works, Lesbians, whom he selected when thou thyself
didst take well-inhabited Lesbos, who then excelled the race of women in
beauty. These will he give thee, and amongst them will be her whom once
he took away, the daughter of Briseïs; and he will moreover swear a
mighty oath, that he never ascended her bed, nor embraced her, as is the
custom. O king, both of men and women. All these shall immediately be in
waiting; and if, moreover, the gods grant that we pillage the vast city
of Priam, entering, thou mayest fill thy ships abundantly with gold and
brass, when we, the Greeks, divide the spoil. Thou shalt also choose
twenty Trojan women, who may be fairest next to Argive Helen. But if we
reach Achæan Argos, the udder of the land, thou mayest become his
son-in-law, and he will honour thee equally with Orestes, who is
nurtured as his darling son, in great affluence. But he has three
daughters in his well-built palace,--Chrysothemis, Laodice, and
Iphianassa. Of these thou shalt conduct the most beloved whomsoever thou
mayest choose, without marriage-gifts, to the house of Peleus; but he
will give very many dowries, such as no man yet gave his daughter. He
will moreover give thee seven well-inhabited cities,--Cardamyle, Enope,
and grassy Ira, glorious Pheræ, with deep-pastured Anthea, fair Æpeia,
and vine-bearing Pedasus; which are all near the sea, the last towards
sandy Pylus. But in them dwell men abounding in flocks and herds, who
will honour thee with gifts like a god, and under thy sceptre pay rich
tributes. These will he fulfil to thee ceasing from thy wrath. But if
indeed the son of Atreus himself and his gifts be more hateful to thee
from thine heart, at least have pity upon all the other Greeks, harassed
throughout the army, who will honour thee as a god; for surely thou wilt
obtain very great honour among them. For now mayest thou slay Hector,
since he hath already come very near thee, possessing destructive fury;
since he declares that no one of the Greeks whom the ships have conveyed
hither is his equal."

   [Footnote 301: But Heyne, "non locum tuituros [nos], sed in naves
   fugituros et discessuros."]

   [Footnote 302: This interpretation is substantiated by Heyne,
   from Il. O, 717. The άκροστόλια, or _figure-heads_, are not meant
   here.]

But him swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed: "Most noble son of
Laertes, much-scheming Ulysses, it behoves me indeed to speak my opinion
without reserve, even as I think, and as will be accomplished, that ye
may not, sitting beside me, keep whining[303] one after another. Hateful
to me as the gates of Hades is he who conceals one thing in his mind and
utters another. But I will speak as appears to me to be best; and I
think that neither Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, nor the other Greeks
will persuade me; since there is no gratitude to him who fights ever
ceaselessly with hostile men. An equal portion [falls] to him who
loiters, as if one continually fight; and the coward is in equal honour
with the brave. The man of no deeds, and the man of many, are wont
equally to die; nor does anything lie by me as a store,[304] because I
have suffered sorrows in my soul, ever risking my life to fight. And as
the bird brings food to her unfledged young when she hath found it,
although she fares badly herself; so have I too spent many sleepless
nights, and gone through bloody days in combat, fighting with heroes for
their wives' sakes. Twelve cities indeed of men have I wasted with my
ships, and on foot I say eleven throughout the fertile Troad.[305] From
all these have I carried off many and precious spoils, and bearing them,
have given all to Agamemnon, the son of Atreus; whilst he, remaining
behind at the swift ships, receiving them, hath distributed but few, but
retained many. To the chiefs and kings hath he given other prizes; to
whom indeed they remain entire: but from me alone of the Greeks hath he
taken it away, and he possesses my spouse, dear to my soul, with whom
reclining, let him delight himself. But why is it necessary that the
Greeks wage war with the Trojans? Or from what necessity did the son of
Atreus, assembling an army, lead it hither? Was it not on account of
fair-haired Helen? Do the sons of Atreus alone, of articulate-speaking
men, love their wives? [Surely not], since whatever man is good and
prudent loves and cherishes his spouse; thus I too loved her from my
soul, though the captive of my spear. And now since he hath snatched my
reward from my hands, and deceived me, let him not make trial of me,
already well informed, for he will not persuade me; but let him consider
with thee, O Ulysses, and the other kings, how he may repel the hostile
fire from the ships. Assuredly he has already accomplished many labours
without me. He has already built a rampart, and drawn a trench broad
[and] large beside it; and planted in it palisades; but not even thus
can he restrain the might of man-slaughtering Hector. Whilst I indeed
fought amongst the Greeks, Hector chose not to arouse the battle at a
distance from the wall, but he came [only] as far as the Scæan gates,
and the beech-tree. There once he awaited me alone, and with difficulty
escaped my attack. But since I choose not to war with noble Hector,
to-morrow,[306] having performed sacrifices to Jove and all the gods,
[and] having well laden my ships, when I shall have drawn them down to
the sea, thou shalt behold, if thou wilt, and if such things be a care
to thee, my ships early in the morn sailing upon the fishy Hellespont,
and men within them, eager for rowing; and if glorious Neptune grant but
a prosperous voyage, on the third day I shall surely reach fertile
Phthia.[307] Now there I have very many possessions, which I left,
coming hither, to my loss.[308] And I will carry hence other gold and
ruddy brass, well-girdled women, and hoary iron, which I have obtained
by lot. But the reward which he gave, king Agamemnon, the son of Atreus,
hath himself insultingly taken from me: to whom do thou tell all things
as I charge thee, openly, that the other Greeks also may be indignant,
if he, ever clad in impudence, still hope to deceive any of the Greeks;
nor let him dare, dog-like as he is, to look in my face. I will neither
join in counsels nor in any action with him; for he hath already
deceived and offended me, nor shall he again overreach me with words. It
is enough for him [to do so once]: but in quiet[309] let him perish, for
provident Jove hath deprived him of reason. Hateful to me are his gifts,
and himself I value not a hair.[310] Not if he were to give me ten and
twenty times as many gifts as he now has, and if others were to be added
from any other quarter; nor as many as arrive at Orchomenos, or
Egyptian Thebes,[311] where numerous possessions are laid up in the
mansions, and where are one hundred gates,[312] from each of which rush
out two hundred men with horses and chariots. Nor if he were to give me
as many as are the sands and dust, not even thus shall Agamemnon ow
persuade my mind, until he indemnify me for all his mind-grieving
insult. But I will not wed the daughter of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus,
not if she were fit to contend in beauty with golden Venus, or were
equal in accomplishments to azure-eyed Minerva; not even thus will I wed
her. Let him then select another of the Greeks who may suit him, and who
is more the king; for if the gods preserve me, and I reach home, then
will Peleus himself hereafter bestow upon me a lady in marriage. There
are many Grecian women throughout Hellas and Phthia, daughters of
chieftains who defend the cities. Whomsoever of these I may choose, I
will make my beloved wife; and there my generous soul very much desires
that I, wedding a betrothed spouse, a fit partner of my bed, should
enjoy the possessions which aged Peleus hath acquired. For not worth my
life are all the [treasures] which they say the well-inhabited city
Ilium possessed, whilst formerly at peace, before the sons of the Greeks
arrived; nor all which the stony threshold of the archer Phœbus Apollo
contains within it, in rocky Pytho.[313] By plunder, oxen and fat sheep
are to be procured, tripods are to be procured, and the yellow heads of
steeds; but the life of man cannot be obtained nor seized, so as to
return again, when once it has passed the enclosure of the teeth. For my
goddess mother, silver-footed Thetis, declares that double destinies
lead me on to the end of death. If, on the one hand, remaining here, I
wage war around the city of the Trojans, return is lost to me, but my
glory will be immortal; but if, on the other hand, I return home to my
dear fatherland, my excellent glory is lost, but my life will be
lasting, nor will the end of death speedily seize upon me. And to others
also would I give advice to sail home, for ye will not find an end of
lofty Ilium; for far-sounding Jove hath stretched over it his hand, and
the people have taken courage. But do ye, departing, bear back this
message to the chiefs of the Greeks, for such is the office of
ambassadors, that they devise within their minds some other better plan,
which for them may preserve their ships, and the army of the Greeks in
the hollow barks; since this, which they have now devised, is not
expedient for them, while I cherish my wrath. But let Phœnix, remaining
here, recline beside us, that to-morrow, if he will, he may follow me
in the ships to my dear fatherland, although I will by no means lead him
away by compulsion."

   [Footnote 303: This word is etymologically connected with τρνγών.
   It properly signifies the moaning of the dove.]

   [Footnote 304: Schol. περισσόν τί εστι. Kennedy explains it: "nor
   have all the toils which I have undergone been productive of any
   superior advantage to me."]

   [Footnote 305: See a list of these cities in Heyne's note.]

   [Footnote 306: Observe the broken construction, well suited to
   the irritability of the speaker.]

   [Footnote 307: Cf. Cicero de Div. i. 25.]

   [Footnote 308: "Εῤῥων, ἐπί φθορᾷ." (ita etym. magn.)
   παραγενόμενος. Cf. Alberti on Hesych. t. i. p. 1445.]

   [Footnote 309: "Εκηλος forcibly expresses the condition of one
   who is advancing imperceptibly, though surely, to final
   ruin."--Kennedy].

   [Footnote 310: See Kennedy, and Duport, Gnom. p. 52, who compare
   the phrases "pilo minus amare", "pili facere." There is, however,
   much uncertainty respecting the origin and meaning of the
   proverb. Cf. Alberti on Hesych. t. i. p. 1246.]

   [Footnote 311: "Thebes was the centre of Egyptian power and
   commerce, probably long before Memphis grew into importance, or
   before the Delta was made suitable to the purposes of husbandry
   by the cutting of canals and the raising of
   embankments."--Egyptian Antiquities, vol. i. p. 66.]

   [Footnote 312: Although Denon (see Egypt. Antt. p. 62) regards
   this as an unmeaning expression, Heyne well observes: "numerus
   centenarius ponitur pro magno: et portis semel memoratis,
   multitudo hominum declaratur per numerum exeuntium."]

   [Footnote 313: Cf. Müller, Dorians, vol. i. pp. 26, 268.]

Thus he spoke; but they all became mute in silence, marvelling at his
speech, for he answered with much vehemence. At length, however, the
aged knight, Phœnix, addressed him, shedding tears, for he greatly
feared for the ships of the Greeks:

"If indeed, O illustrious Achilles, thou dost now meditate a return
within thy mind, nor art at all willing to repel the destructive fire
from the swift ships, because indignation hath fallen upon thy soul; how
then can I, my dear child, be left here alone by thee? for aged Peleus,
the breaker of steeds, sent me forth with thee on that day, when he
despatched thee from Phthia to Agamemnon, a boy, not yet skilled either
in equally-destroying war, nor in counsels where men also become
illustrious. On which account he sent me forth to teach thee all these
things, that thou mightest become both an orator in words and a
performer in deeds. Thus then, my dear child, I wish not at length to be
left by thee, not even if a god himself, having divested me of old age,
should promise that he would render me a blooming youth, such as I was
when first I quitted fair-damed Hellas, flying the contentions of my
father Amyntor, son of Ormenus; who was enraged with me on account of a
fair-haired concubine whom he himself loved, but dishonoured his wife,
my mother. But she continually would embrace my knees in supplication,
that I should first have connection with the concubine, that she might
loathe the old man. Her I obeyed, and did so; but my father immediately
perceiving it, uttered many execrations, and invoked the hateful
Erinnys, that no dear son, sprung from me, should ever be placed upon
his knees; and the gods ratified his execrations, both infernal Jove and
dread Proserpine. Then my soul within my mind could no longer endure
that I should sojourn in the palace whilst my father was enraged. My
friends, indeed, and relations, being much about me, detained me there
within the halls, entreating [me to stay]. Many fat sheep and
stamping-footed, crooked-horned oxen they slaughtered; many swine
abounding in fat were stretched out to be roasted in the flame of
Vulcan, and much of the old man's wine was drunk out of earthen vessels.
Nine nights did they sleep around me: whilst, taking it in turns, they
kept watch; nor was the fire ever extinguished, one in the portico of
the well-fenced hall, and another in the vestibule, before the
chamber-doors. But when at length the tenth shady night had come upon
me, then indeed I rushed forth, having burst the skilfully-joined doors
of the apartment, and I easily overleaped the fence of the hall,
escaping the notice of the watchmen and the female domestics. Afterwards
I fled thence through spacious Hellas, and came to fertile Phthia, the
mother of sheep, to king Peleus; who kindly received me, and loved me
even as a father loves his only son, born in his old age[314] to ample
possessions. He made me opulent, and bestowed upon me much people, and I
inhabited the extreme shores of Phthia, ruling over the Dolopians. Thee
too, O godlike Achilles, have I rendered what thou art,[315] loving thee
from my soul; since thou wouldst not go with another to the feast, nor
take food in the mansion, until I, placing thee upon my knees, satisfied
thee with viands, previously carving them, and supplied thee with wine.
Often hast thou wetted the tunic upon my breast, ejecting the wine in
infant peevishness.[316] Thus have I borne very many things from thee,
and much have I laboured, thinking this, that since the gods have not
granted an offspring to me from myself, I should at least make thee my
son, O Achilles, like unto the gods, that thou mightst yet repel from me
unworthy destiny. But O Achilles, subdue thy mighty rage; it is by no
means necessary for thee to have a merciless heart. Flexible are even
the gods themselves, whose virtue, honour, and might are greater [than
thine]. Even these, when any one transgresses and errs, do men divert
[from their wrath] by sacrifices and appeasing vows, and frankincense
and savour. For Prayers also are the daughters of supreme Jove,[317]
both halt, and wrinkled, and squint-eyed; which following on Ate from
behind, are full of care. But Ate is robust and sound in limb, wherefore
she far outstrips all, and arrives first at every land, doing injury to
men; whilst these afterwards cure them.[318] Whosoever will reverence
the daughters of Jove approaching, him they are wont greatly to aid, and
hear when praying. But whosoever will deny and obstinately refuse them,
then indeed, drawing near, they entreat Saturnian Jove, that Ate may
follow along with him, that being injured [in turn], he may pay the
penalty. But O Achilles, do thou too yield honour to accompany the
daughters of Jove, which bends the minds of other brave men; for if
Atrides brought not gifts, and did not mention others in futurity, but
would ever rage vehemently, I for my part would not advise that, casting
away wrath, thou shouldst defend the Greeks, although greatly in need.
But now he at once gives both many immediately, and promises others
hereafter; moreover, he hath despatched the best men to supplicate thee,
having selected throughout the Grecian army those who are dearest to
thyself; whose entreaty do not thou despise, nor their mission, although
formerly fault was not to be found with thee, because thou wert enraged.
Thus also have we heard the renown of heroes of former days, when
vehement wrath came upon any, [that] they were both appeasable by gifts,
and to be reconciled by words. I remember this ancient and by no means
modern deed, of what sort it was; and I will repeat it among you all,
being friends. The Curetes and Ætolians, obstinate in battle, fought
around the city of Calydon, and slaughtered each other; the Ætolians, in
defence of lofty Calydon, the Curetes, eager to lay it waste in war; for
between them had golden-throned Diana excited mischief, indignant
because Œneus had not offered the first-fruits in sacrifice in the
fertile spot of ground:[319] whilst the other gods feasted on hecatombs,
but to the daughter of mighty Jove alone he sacrificed not. Either he
forgot,[320] or did not think of it, but he did greatly err in mind. But
she, the daughter of Jove, delighting in arrows, enraged, sent against
[him] a sylvan wild boar, with white tusks, which did much detriment, as
is the wont [of boars], to the land of Œneus. And many tall trees, one
after another, did he prostrate on the ground, with their very roots and
the blossom of their fruit. But him Meleager, son of Œneus, slew,
assembling huntsmen and dogs from many cities; for he would not have
been subdued by a few mortals: so mighty was he, and he caused many to
ascend the sad funeral-pile. Still she (Diana) excited around him[321] a
great tumult and war between the Curetes and magnanimous Ætolians, for
the head and bristly skin of the boar.[322] Whilst warlike Meleager
fought, so long were the Curetes unsuccessful; nor were they able,
although numerous, to remain without the wall. But when wrath, which
swells the minds of others, though very prudent, within their breasts,
came upon Meleager, for, enraged at heart with his dear mother Althæa,
he remained inactive beside his wedded wife, fair Cleopatra, daughter of
Marpessa, the handsome-footed child of Evenus and Idas, who was then the
bravest of earthly men, and even lifted a bow against king Phœbus
Apollo, for the sake of his fair-ankled spouse. Her [Cleopatra] then her
father and venerable mother in the palace were accustomed to call by the
surname of Alcyone, because her mother, having the plaintive note of sad
Alcyone,[323] lamented when far-darting Phœbus Apollo stole her away.
Beside her he [Meleager] remained inactive, brooding[324] over his sad
anger, enraged because of the curses of his mother, who, much grieving,
prayed to the gods on account of the murder of her brethren.[325] Often
with her hands did she strike the fruitful earth, calling upon Pluto and
dread Proserpine, reclining upon her knees, whilst her bosom was bedewed
with tears, to give death to her son: but her the Erinnys, wandering in
gloom, possessing an implacable heart, heard from Erebus. Then
immediately was there noise and tumult of these[326] excited round the
gates, the towers being battered. Then did the elders of the Ætolians
entreat him, and sent chosen priests to the gods, that he would come
forth and defend them, promising a great gift. Where the soil of fertile
Calydon was richest, there they ordered him to choose a beautiful
enclosure of fifty acres; the one half, of land fit for vines, to cut
off the other half of plain land, free from wood, for tillage. Much did
aged Œneus, breaker of steeds, beseech him, having ascended to the
threshold of his lofty-roofed chamber, shaking the well-glued door-post,
supplicating his son. And much also his sisters and venerable mother
entreated him, but he the more refused; and much [prayed] the companions
who were dearest and most friendly of all; but not even thus did they
persuade the soul within his breast, until his chamber was violently
assailed, and the Curetes were in the act of scaling the ramparts, and
firing the great city. Then indeed at length his fair-girdled spouse,
weeping, supplicated Meleager, and recounted all the disasters, as many
as happen to men whose city may be taken. In the first place, they slay
the men,[327] whilst fire reduces the city to ashes; and others carry
off the children and deep-zoned women. Then was his soul disturbed when
he heard of evil deeds, and he hasted to go and gird the all-glittering
armour around his body. Thus he repelled the evil day from the Ætolians,
yielding to his own inclination; but they did not make good to him the
many and pleasing gifts; but he nevertheless warded off evil. But
revolve not such things within thy mind, O my friend, nor let the
deity[328] thus turn thee, since it would be more dishonourable to
assist the ships [when already] set on fire. Rather come for the gifts,
for the Greeks will honour thee equally with a god. If again without
gifts thou enter the man-destroying battle, thou wilt not receive equal
honour, although warding off the war."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed: "Phœnix, respected
father, old man, Jove-nurtured, to me there is no need of this honour,
for I conceive that I have been honoured by the behest of Jove, which
will detain me at the crooked ships whilst breath remains in my bosom,
and my knees have the power of motion. But I will tell thee something
else, and do thou revolve it in thy mind. Disturb not my soul, weeping
and lamenting, gratifying the hero Atrides; it is not at all necessary
that thou love him, that thou mayest not be hated by me, who love thee.
It is proper for thee with me to give annoyance to him who hath annoyed
me. Rule equally with me, and receive my honour in half.[329] These will
bear back my message; but do thou, remaining here, recline upon a soft
bed, and with morn appearing let us consult whether we shall return to
our native land or remain."

   [Footnote 314: See, however, Buttm. Lexil. p. 510, sqq., who
   considers that τηλύγετος simply means "_tenderly beloved_; only
   that it is a more forcible expression for this idea, as is
   evident from the bad sense in which the word is used at II. v.
   470, where the meaning of a child _spoiled_ by the love of its
   parents is evident."]

   [Footnote 315: _I.e._ I reared thee to thy present age. Lit. "I
   made thee so great."]

   [Footnote 316: If any one should despise these natural details as
   trifling and beneath the dignity of poetry, I can only recommend
   a comparison with Æsch. Choeph. 750, sqq., and Shakspeare's nurse
   in "Romeo and Juliet." In such passages, the age of the supposed
   speaker is the best apology for the poet.]

   [Footnote 317: See Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 57.]

   [Footnote 318: Perhaps it was from this passage that Sterne took
   his sublime idea of the Recording Angel blotting out the oath
   which the Accusing Spirit had carried up to heaven.]

   [Footnote 319: Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 54. Μνημοσύνη, γουνοῖσιν
   ἐλευθῆρος μεδέουσα. Like οὖθαρ ἀρούρης, in ver. 141, it is an
   expression denoting excessive fertility.]

   [Footnote 320: So Xenoph. de Venat. § 1. Οἴνεως δ' ἐν γήρᾳ
   ἐπιλαθομένου τῆς ϑεοῦ. See an excellent sketch of the story in
   Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq. Cf. Hygin. Fab. clxxii.; Lactant.
   Arg. fab. Ovid. viii. 4; Antonin. Lib. Met. § 2.]

   [Footnote 321: _I. e._ the boar.]

   [Footnote 322: On the legend of this war, see Apollodor. i. 8, 2;
   Callimach. Ib. Dian. 216; Ovid, Met. viii. 260. A catalogue of
   the heroes who accompanied Meleager is given by Hyginus, Fab.
   clxxiii.]

   [Footnote 323: See Antonin. Liberal. Met. § 2. who follows Homer
   rather closely.]

   [Footnote 324: Literally, "digesting."]

   [Footnote 325: See n. 2, p. 41, and on the death of Meleager, by
   his mother burning a fatal brand, Apollodor. i. c.; Zenobius
   Cent. Adag. v. 33; Anton. Lib. Met. § 2.]

   [Footnote 326: _I. e._ the Calydonians.]

   [Footnote 327: This catalogue of the horrors of war seems to have
   been in the minds of Sallust, Cat. § 51, and Cicero, Or. iv. in
   Catil.]

   [Footnote 328: Rudolf on Ocellus Lucan. p. 266, well observes,
   "Antiquissimis temporibus, quorum repetere memoriam possumus,
   δαίμων nihil aliud erat, quam deus. Horn. Od. γ, 165, 160; Il. γ,
   420; II. λ, 791. Neque in eo vocabuli discrimen est, si aut
   prosunt hominibus, aut iis nocent; utroque enim modo δαίμονες
   dicuntur." Kennedy and some of the translators have erred on this
   point.]

   [Footnote 329: _I. e._ καϑ' ἥμισυ. See Heyne.]

He said, and in silence nodded to Patroclus from beneath his brows, that
he should strew a thick bed for Phœnix, whilst they were meditating to
withdraw as quickly as possible from the tent. But them godlike
Telamonian Ajax addressed:

"O Jove-born son of Laertes, crafty Ulysses, let us go, for the object
of our address appears not to me to be attainable, in this way at least,
and we must report the message to the Greeks with all haste, although it
be not good. They now sit expecting us; but Achilles stores up within
his breast a fierce and haughty soul, unyielding; nor does he regard the
friendship of his companions, with which we have honoured him at the
ships beyond others. Merciless one! and truly some one hath accepted
compensation even for a brother's death, or his own son slain, whilst
[the murderer] remains at home among his people, having paid many
expiations: and the mind and noble soul of the other is appeased upon
his having received compensation. But in thy breast the gods have put an
unyielding and evil mind, for the sake of a maid only; whereas we now
offer thee seven far excelling, and many other gifts beside them. Do
thou then assume a propitious disposition; and have respect to thy
house, for we are guests beneath thy roof from the multitude of the
Greeks, and desire to be most dear and friendly to thee beyond all the
Achæans, as many as they are."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed: "Most noble Ajax,
son of Telamon, chief of the people, thou appearest to me to have said
all this from thy soul, yet does my heart swell with indignation as
often as I recollect those things, how the son of Atreus hath rendered
me dishonoured among the Greeks, as if it were some contemptible
stranger. But go ye, and carry back my message, for I shall not think of
bloody war, before the son of warlike Priam, noble Hector, slaughtering
the Greeks, shall reach the ships of the Myrmidons, and burn the ships
with fire. But about my tent and black ship, however, I think that
Hector, although eager, will desist from combat."

Thus he spake; but they, each having seized a double goblet, having made
libations, went back by the side of the fleet, and Ulysses led the way.
But Patroclus gave orders to his companions and female domestics to
strew, with all haste, a thick couch for Phœnix; and they, obedient,
spread a bed as he desired,--sheep-skins, coverlets, and the fine fabric
of flax: there lay the old man, and awaited heavenly Morn. But Achilles
slept in the recess of his well-made tent; and beside him lay a lady,
fair-cheeked Diomede, daughter of Phorbas, whom he had brought from
Lesbos. And Patroclus on the other side reclined: and by him also lay
fair-waisted Iphis, whom noble Achilles gave him, having taken lofty
Scyros, a city of Enyeus.

But when they were within the tents of Atrides, the sons of the Greeks,
rising one after another, received them with golden cups, and
interrogated thus. And first the king of men, Agamemnon, inquired:

"Come, tell me, O Ulysses, much praised, great glory of the Greeks,
whether does he wish to ward off the hostile fire from the ships, or has
he refused, and does wrath still posses his haughty soul?"

But him much-enduring, noble Ulysses then addressed: "Most glorious son
of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, he wills not to extinguish his wrath,
but is the more filled with anger, and despises thee as well as thy
gifts. He bids thee thyself consult with the Greeks, in what manner thou
mayest preserve both the ships and the army of the Greeks, but has
himself threatened, that with the rising dawn he will launch into the
main his well-benched, equally-plied vessels. And he has declared that
he would advise others also to sail home, since ye will not now effect
the destruction of lofty Ilium; for far-resounding Jove hath greatly
stretched forth his hand [over it], and the people have taken courage.
Thus he spoke; and here are these who followed me, Ajax, and the two
heralds, both prudent men, to tell these things. But aged Phœnix hath
lain down there, for thus he ordered, that in the morning, if he chose,
he might follow him in the ships to his dear father-land; but he will by
no means carry him off against his will."

Thus he spake; and they all became mute in silence, marvelling at his
speech, for he harangued with great vehemence. Long were the sorrowing
sons of the Greeks mute, till at length Diomede, valiant in the din of
battle, addressed them:

"Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, would that thou
hadst not supplicated the illustrious son of Peleus, offering countless
gifts, for he is haughty even otherwise:[330] now again hast thou
excited him much more to insolence. Let us, however, leave him alone,
whether he go or remain, for he will fight again at that time when his
mind within his breast urges, and the Deity incites him. But come, let
us all obey as I shall advise: go now to rest, having satisfied your
hearts with food and wine, for this is force and vigour. But when fair
rosy-fingered morn has shone forth, draw up the infantry and cavalry
with all haste before the ships, cheering them: and do thou thyself
likewise fight in the foremost ranks."

Thus he spake, but all the kings approved, admiring the speech of
Diomede, the breaker of steeds. Having then offered libations, they
departed each to his tent; there they lay do to to rest, and enjoyed the
boon of sleep.[331]

   [Footnote 330: I am indebted to Milton.]

   [Footnote 331: Id.]




                            BOOK THE TENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Diomede and Ulysses, as spies, penetrate the camp of the Trojans by
night, and first entrap and slay Dolon, who had set out on the same
errand for the Trojans. Having obtained from him the desired
information, they then attack the Thracians, and slay their king,
Rhesus, while asleep. At the suggestion of Minerva, they then return to
the camp.

The other chiefs, indeed, of all the Greeks were sleeping the whole
night at the ships, overcome by soft slumber; but sweet sleep possessed
not Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, shepherd of the people, revolving many
things in his mind. As when the husband of fair-haired Juno thunders,
preparing either an abundant, immense shower, or hail or snow, when the
snow whitens the fields; or somewhere [preparing] the wide mouth[332] of
bitter war; so frequently groaned Agamemnon in his breast from the
bottom of his heart, and his mind was troubled within him. As often
indeed as he looked towards the Trojan plain, he wondered at the many
fires which were burning before Ilium, the sound of flutes and pipes,
and the tumult of men. But when he looked towards the ships and army of
the Greeks, he tore up many hairs from his head by the roots,[333]
[enraged at] Jove who dwells aloft, and deeply he groaned in his noble
heart. But this plan appeared best to him in his judgment; to repair
first to Neleian Nestor, [and see] whether with him he might contrive
some blameless counsel, which might be an averter of evil. Rising,
therefore, he wrapped his coat around his breast, and beneath his smooth
feet bound the beautiful sandals; next he threw around him the
blood-stained skin of a huge, tawny[334] lion, stretching to his ankles,
and grasped his spear. In like manner, a tremor possessed Menelaus, for
neither did sleep rest upon his eyelids, [through fear] lest the Greeks
should suffer aught, who on his account had come over the wide sea to
Troy, waging daring war. First with a spotted leopard's skin he covered
his broad back; and next, lifting his brazen helmet, placed it upon his
head, and grasped a spear in his stout hand. But he went to awaken his
brother, who had the chief command of all the Greeks, and was honoured
by the people like a god. Him he found by the prow of his ship, putting
his bright armour around his shoulders; and arriving, he was welcome to
him. Him first Menelaus, valiant in the din of war, addressed: "Why arm
thus, my respected brother? Or whom dost thou urge of thy companions to
go as a spy amongst the Trojans? In truth I very much fear that no one
will undertake this deed, going alone through the dead of night to
reconnoitre the enemy. Any one [who does so] will be bold-hearted
indeed."

   [Footnote 332: Cicero pro Arch. § 5, "Totius belli ore ac
   faucibus."]

   [Footnote 333: Or "one after another." Schol.: ἐπ' ἀλλήλους, ἢ
   προῤῥίζους. See Merrick on Tryphiodor. 388; Alberti on Hesych. t.
   ii. p. 1029.]

   [Footnote 334: Or, "active, raging." The other interpretation is,
   however, favoured by Virg. Æn. ii. 721: "Fulvique insternor pelle
   leonis."]

But him king Agamemnon, answering, addressed: "O Jove-nurtured Menelaus,
need of prudent counsel [comes upon] both thee and me, which will
protect and preserve the Greeks and their ships, since the mind of Jove
is altered. Surely he has rather given his attention to the Hectorean
sacrifices; for never have I beheld, nor heard a person who related,
that one man has devised so many arduous deeds in one day as Hector,
dear to Jove, hath performed upon the sons of the Greeks in such a
manner, [although] the dear child neither of a goddess nor of a god. But
such deeds hath he done as I conceive will long and for many a day be a
cause of care to the Greeks; so many evils hath he wrought against the
Greeks. But go now, call Ajax and Idomeneus, running quickly to their
ships, but I will go to noble Nestor, and exhort him to arise, if he be
willing to go to the sacred company[335] of guards and give orders; for
to him will they most attentively listen, because his son commands the
guards, along with Meriones, the armour-bearer of Idomeneus; for to them
we intrusted the chief charge."

   [Footnote 335: Some picked troop chosen for the especial purpose
   of keeping watch. Heyne compares Σ, 504: ἱερὸς κύκλος; Ω, 681:
   λαθὼν ἱεροὺς πυλαωρούς. Compare, also, the ἱερὸς λόχος of the
   Thebans, Plutarch, in Pelop. t. i. p. 285; E. Athen. xiii. p.
   561.]

But him Menelaus, valiant in the din of war, then answered: "In what
manner dost thou command and exhort me in thy speech? Shall I remain
there with them, waiting till thou come, or shall I run back again to
thee, after I have duly given them orders?"

But him, in turn, Agamemnon, king of men, addressed: "Wait there, lest,
as we come, we miss[336] one another; for there are many ways through
the camp. But shout aloud whithersoever thou goest, and enjoin them to
be watchful, accosting each man by a name from his paternal race,[337]
honourably addressing all; nor be thou haughty in thy mind. Nay, let
even us ourselves labour, whatever be our station, so heavy a calamity
hath Jove laid upon us at our birth."

Thus saying, he dismissed his brother, having duly charged him. But he
hastened to go to Nestor, the shepherd of the people. Him he found on
his soft couch beside his tent and black ship, and by him lay his
variegated arms, a shield, two spears, and a glittering helmet: beside
him also lay a flexible belt, with which the old man girded himself,
when he was arming for man-destroying war, leading on his people; since
he by no means yielded to sad old age. Being supported on his
elbow,[338] and lifting up his head, he addressed the son of Atreus, and
questioned him in [these] words:

   [Footnote 336: Buttmann, Lexil. p. 85, comes to the conclusion
   that "we must include ἀθροτάζειν among the forms of άμαρτάνω,
   whose etymological connections, as long as we are ignorant of
   them, we can easily do without."]

   [Footnote 337: Instances of this complimentary style of address
   occur in ver. 144. Διογενὲς Λαερτιάδη. 86: Νέστορ Νηληϊάδη.]

   [Footnote 338: Cf. Propert. 1. 3, 34. "Sic ait in molli fixa toro
   cubitum."]

"Who art thou who comest thus alone by the ships, along the army, during
the gloomy night, when other mortals are asleep? Whether seeking any of
the guards, or any of thy companions? Speak, nor approach me in silence;
of what is there need to thee?"

But him Agamemnon, king of men, then answered: "O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Greeks, thou wilt recognize Agamemnon, the son of
Atreus, whom beyond all Jove hath plunged into toils continually, whilst
breath remains in my breast, or my knees have the power of motion. I
wander[339] thus, because sweet sleep sits not on mine eyes, but war and
the calamities of the Greeks are my care. For I greatly fear for the
Greeks, neither is my heart firm, but I am confounded.[340] My heart
leaps without my breast, and my fair limbs tremble beneath. But if thou
canst do aught (since neither doth sleep come upon thee), come, let us
go down to the guards, that we may see whether, worn out by toil and
[overpowered][341] by sleep, they slumber, and are altogether forgetful
of the watch. And hostile men are encamped near, nor do we at all know
but that they perhaps meditate in their minds to engage even during the
night." [342]

But him Nestor, the Gerenian knight, then answered: "Agamemnon, most
glorious son of Atreus, king of men, assuredly provident Jove will not
accomplish to Hector all those devices, which now, perhaps, he expects;
but I think that he will labour under even more cares if Achilles shall
but turn away his heart from heavy wrath. Yet will I willingly follow
thee; and let us moreover incite others, both spear-renowned Diomede,
and Ulysses, swift Ajax, and the valiant son of Phyleus. But if any one
going, would call godlike Ajax, and king Idomeneus; for their ships are
the farthest off,[343] and by no means near at hand. But I will chide
Menelaus, dear and respected though he be, nor will I conceal, even if
thou shouldst be displeased with me, since thus he sleeps, and has
permitted thee alone to labour. For now ought he to labour, supplicating
among all the chiefs, for a necessity, no longer tolerable, invades us."

   [Footnote 339: Æsch. Ag. 12: Εὐτ' ἂν δὲ νυκτίπλαγκτον ἔνδροσόν τ'
   ἔχω Ευνὴν ὀνείροις οὐκ ἐπισκοπουμένην Ἑμὴν, ϕόθος γὰρ ἀνθ' ὄπνου
   παραστατεῖ.]

   [Footnote 340: Cicero ad Attic, ix. 6: "Non angor, sed ardeo
   dolore; οὐδέ μοι ἦτορ ἔμπεδον, ἀλλ' ἀλαλύκτημαι. Non sum, inquam,
   mihi crede, mentis compos."]

   [Footnote 341: Observe the zeugma, which has been imitated by
   Hor. Od. III. 4, 11: "Ludo fatigatumque somno." Compare the
   learned dissertation on this subject by D'Orville on Chariton,
   iv. 4, p. 440, sqq. ed. Lips.]

   [Footnote 342: Æsch. Sept. c. Th. 28: Λέγει μεγίστην προσζολὴν
   Ἀχαΐδα Νυκτηγορεῖσθαι κἀπιθουλεύειν πόλει.]

   [Footnote 343: Soph. Aj. 3: Καὶ νῦν ἐπὶ sκηναῖϛ σε ναυτικαῖϛ ὁρῶ
   Αἴαντος, ἔνθα τάξιν ἐσχάτην ἔχει.]

But him Agamemnon, king of men, in turn addressed: "Old man, at other
times I would even bid thee blame him, for he is frequently remiss, and
is not willing to labour, yielding neither to sloth, nor thoughtlessness
of mind, but looking to me, and awaiting my commencement. But now he
arose long before me, and stood beside me; him I have sent before to
call those whom thou seekest. But let us go, and we shall find them
before the gates among the guards; for there I bade them be assembled."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "If so, none of the
Greeks will be angry, nor disobey when he may exhort or give orders to
any."

Thus saying, he put on his tunic around his breast, and beneath his
shining feet he placed the beautiful sandals, and fastened about him his
purple cloak with a clasp, double, ample;[344] and the shaggy pile was
thick upon it: and he seized a doughty spear, pointed with sharp brass.
He proceeded first to the ships of the brazen-mailed Achæans; then the
Gerenian knight Nestor, vociferating, aroused from his sleep Ulysses,
equal to Jove in counsel. But the voice immediately penetrated his mind,
and he came out from the tent, and addressed them:

"Why, I pray, wander ye thus alone through the ambrosial night, near the
ships, through the army; what so great necessity now comes upon you?"

   [Footnote 344: Schol.: Τὴν μεγάλην, ωστε καὶ διπλῇ αὐτή χρώμενον
   ἔχειν ἐκτεταμένην. The epithet φοινικόεσσα denotes that it was
   the garb of royalty.]

But him Nestor, the Gerenian knight, then answered: "Jove-sprung son of
Laertes, much-scheming Ulysses, be not indignant, for so great a sorrow
hath oppressed the Greeks. But follow, that we may arouse even another,
whomsoever it is fit, to deliberate whether to fly or fight."

Thus he spake, and much-counselling Ulysses returning into his tent,
flung around his shoulders his variegated shield, and followed them. But
they proceeded to Diomede, the son of Tydeus, and him they found
without, before his tent, with his arms; and his companions slept around
him. Beneath their heads they had their shields, and their spears were
fixed erect upon the nether point;[345] and afar off glittered the
brass, like the lightning of father Jove. The hero himself however
slumbered, and beneath him was strewed the hide of a wild bull; but
under his head was spread a splendid piece of tapestry. Standing by him,
the Gerenian knight Nestor awoke him, moving him on the heel with his
foot,[346] he roused him, and upbraided [him] openly:

"Arise, son of Tydeus, why dost thou indulge in sleep all night? Hearest
thou not how the Trojans are encamped upon an eminence in the plain near
the ships, and that now but a small space keeps them off?"

   [Footnote 345: Σαυρωτῆροι' τοῖς στύραξιν τῶν οπίσω τῶν δοράτων.
   Hesychius, who also, with reference to the present passage, has
   Σαυρωτῆρος' τοῦ σιδηρίου. Pollux, x. 31, well explains it, τὸ τοῦ
   δόρατος ἰστάμενον It is also called στύραξ and στυρά.]

   [Footnote 346: Not "calce pedis movens." See Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke: but he leaped up very quickly from slumber, and
addressing him, spoke winged words:

"Indefatigable art thou, old man: never, indeed, dost thou cease from
labour. Are there not even other younger sons of the Greeks, who, going
about in every direction, might arouse each of the kings? But, O old
man, thou art impossible to be wearied."

But him then the Gerenian knight Nestor in turn addressed: "Truly, my
friend, thou hast spoken all these things aright. I have to be sure
blameless sons, and I have numerous troops, some of whom indeed, going
round, might give the summons. But a very great necessity hath oppressed
the Greeks, and now are the affairs of all balanced on a razor's
edge[347], whether there be most sad destruction to the Greeks, or life.
Yet go now, since thou art younger, arouse swift Ajax, and the son of
Phyleus, if thou hast pity on me."

   [Footnote 347: Herodot. vii. 11: Επὶ ξυροῦ γὰp τῆς ἀκμῆς ἔχεται
   ἡμῖν τα πράγματα. Soph. Antig. 996: Φρόνει βεζὼς αὖ νῦν ἐπὶ ξυροῦ
   τύνη. Theocrit. xxii. 6: Ἀνθρώπων σωτῆρες ἐπὶ ξυοοῦ ἤδη ἐόντων.]

Thus he spake; but the other threw around his shoulders the skin of a
huge tawny lion, reaching to his feet, and took his spear. He hastened
forth, and the hero, having aroused the rest, led them thence.

But when they now came to the assembled guards, they found not the
leaders of the guards slumbering, but all were sitting vigilantly with
their arms. As dogs with care keep watch around the sheep in a fold,
hearing the furious wild beast, which comes through the wood from the
mountains, but much clamour of men and dogs is against it, and sleep is
utterly lost to them; so was sweet slumber lost to their eyelids,
keeping guard during the sad night, for they were ever turned towards
the plain, whensoever they heard the Trojans advancing. But the old man
seeing them, rejoiced, and encouraged them with a speech, and addressing
them, spoke winged words:

"Thus now, dear children, keep watch; nor let sleep seize upon any, lest
we become a mockery to the enemy."

Thus saying, he crossed the trench; and with him followed the chiefs of
the Greeks, as many as had been summoned to the council. Along with
these went Meriones, and the illustrious son of Nestor; for they had
invited them, that they might consult with them. Having therefore passed
over the dug trench, they sat down in a clear space, where a piece of
ground appeared free from fallen dead bodies, whence impetuous Hector
had turned back, having destroyed the Greeks, when night at length
enveloped them. There sitting down, they addressed words to each other,
and to them the Gerenian knight Nestor began discourse:

"O friends, would not now some man put such confidence in his own
daring mind as to go against the magnanimous Trojans, if perchance he
might take some of the enemy straying in the outskirts of the camp, or
perhaps even learn some report among the Trojans, what they deliberate
among themselves; whether they intend to remain here by the ships at a
distance, or are about to return to the city, since they have subdued
the Greeks? Could he but hear all this, and come back to us unscathed,
great glory would be his under heaven amongst all men, and he shall have
a good reward. For as many chiefs as command the vessels, of all these
each will give a black sheep, a ewe, having a lamb at its udders; to
which indeed no possession will be like; and he will ever be present at
our banquets and feasts."

Thus he spoke; and they were all mute in silence; but to them Diomede,
valiant in the din of battle, said:

"Nestor, my heart and gallant spirit urge me to enter the camp of the
hostile Trojans, which is near; but if some other man were to go along
with me, there would be more pleasure, and it would be more encouraging.
For when two go together, the one perceives before the other how the
advantage may be. But if one being alone should observe anything, his
perception is nevertheless more tardy, and his judgment weak."

Thus he spoke: and the greater number wished to follow Diomede. The two
Ajaces wished it, servants of Mars; Meriones wished it; the son of
Nestor very earnestly desired it; the spear-renowned son of Atreus,
Menelaus, desired it; and hardy Ulysses was eager to penetrate the crowd
of the Trojans; for ever daring was his mind within his breast. Among
them, however, Agamemnon, the king of men, spoke:

"Diomede, son of Tydeus, most dear to my soul, select the companion whom
thou desirest, the bravest of those who present themselves, since many
are ready. Nor do thou, paying deference in thy mind, leave indeed the
better, and select as follower the worse, through respect [for rank];
looking neither to family, nor whether one is more the king."

Thus he spake, for he feared for yellow-haired Menelaus; but amongst
them Diomede, brave in the din of battle, again spoke:

"If then ye now order me to select a companion myself, how can I now
forget godlike Ulysses, whose heart is prudent, and spirit gallant in
all labours; and whom Pallas Minerva loves. He following, we should both
return even from burning fire, for he is skilled in planning beyond [all
others]."

But him much-enduring, noble Ulysses in turn addressed: "Son of Tydeus,
neither praise me beyond measure, nor at all blame, for thou speakest
these things amongst Argives, who are acquainted with them already. But
let us go, for night hastens on, and morn is at hand. The stars have
already far advanced, and the greater portion of the night, by two
parts, has gone by, but the third portion remains."

Thus having spoken, they clad themselves in their terrible arms. To
Diomede, Thrasymedes, firm in war, gave his two-edged sword, because his
own was left at the ships, and a shield. Upon his head he placed his
bull's-hide helmet, coneless, crestless, which is called cataityx,[348]
and protects the heads of blooming youths. And Meriones gave a bow,
quiver, and sword to Ulysses, and put upon his head a casque of hide;
and within, it was firmly bound with many straps; whilst without, the
white teeth of an ivory-tusked boar set thick together on all sides
fenced it well, and skilfully; and in the midst a woollen
head-piece[349] was sewed. It Autolycus once brought from Eleon, the
city of Amyntor, son of Hormenus, having broken into his large mansion.
He gave it, however, to Amphidamas, the Cytherian, to bear to Scandea,
and Amphidamas bestowed it upon Molus, to be a gift of hospitality, but
he gave it to his son Meriones to be worn. Then at last, being placed
around, it covered the head of Ulysses. But they, when they had girt
themselves in dreadful arms, hastened to advance, and left all the
chiefs at the same place. And to them near the way, Pallas Minerva sent
a heron upon the right hand: they did not discern it with their eyes,
because of the gloomy night, but heard it rustling. And Ulysses was
delighted on account of the bird, and prayed to Minerva:

"Hear me, thou daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, who standest by me in all
labours, nor do I escape thy notice, having moved.[350] Now again do
thou, O Minerva, especially befriend me, and grant that, covered with
glory, we may return back to the well-benched barks, having performed a
mighty deed, which will surely occasion care to the Trojans."

   [Footnote 348: "The καταῖτυξ might be termed the undress helmet
   of the chief who wore it."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 349: Or, "it was stuffed with felt."--Oxford Transl.
   "Wool was inlaid between the straps, in order to protect the
   head, and make the helmet fit closer."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 350: Soph. Aj. 18: Καὶ νῦν ἐπέγνως εὖ μ ἐπ' ἀνδρὶ
   δυσμενεῖ Βάσιν ευκλοῦντ'.]

Then Diomede, brave in the din of battle, next prayed: "Now hear me,
too, O daughter of Jove, invincible. Attend me, as once thou didst
attend my sire, the noble Tydeus, to Thebes, what time he went as an
ambassador for the Achæans; he left the brazen-mailed Achæans at the
Asopus, and he himself bore thither a mild message to the Cadmæans: but
when returning he performed many arduous deeds, with thy aid, O noble
goddess, when thou propitious didst stand beside him. Thus now willingly
stand by and protect me; and in return I will sacrifice to thee a heifer
of a year old, with broad forehead, untamed, which no man hath yet
brought under the yoke. This will I sacrifice to thee, encircling its
horns with gold."

Thus they spoke, praying; and Pallas Minerva heard them. But when they
had supplicated the daughter of mighty Jove, they hastened to advance,
like two lions, through the dark night, through slaughter, through
bodies through arms, and black blood.

Nor did Hector allow the gallant Trojans to sleep; but he summoned all
the chiefs together, as many as were leaders and rulers over the
Trojans. Having summoned them together, he framed prudent counsel:

"Who, undertaking it for me, will accomplish this deed for a great
reward? And there shall be sufficient payment for him; for I will give a
chariot and two rough-maned steeds, which excel in speed at the swift
sailing ships of the Greeks, to him whosoever would dare (he will also
obtain glory for himself) to approach near the swift-sailing ships, and
learn whether the fleet ships are guarded as formerly, or whether, now
subdued by our hands, they meditate flight among themselves, nor wish to
keep watch during the night, overcome with grievous toil."

Thus he spoke; but they were all still in silence. But among the Trojans
there was one Dolon, the son of Eumedes, a divine herald, rich in gold,
and wealthy in brass, who in aspect indeed was deformed, but [was]
swift-footed, and he was an only [son] among five sisters. Who then,
standing by, addressed the Trojans and Hector:

"Hector, my heart and gallant spirit urge me to approach the
swift-sailing ships, and gain information. But come, raise up thy
sceptre to me, and swear that thou wilt assuredly give me the horses and
chariot, variegated with brass, which now bear the illustrious son of
Peleus, and I will not be a vain spy to thee, nor frustrate thy
expectation; for I will go so far into the camp till I reach the ship of
Agamemnon, where the chiefs will perchance be consulting whether to fly
or fight."

Thus he spoke; but he took the sceptre in his hand and swore to him:
"Let Jove himself now be my witness, the loudly-thundering spouse of
Juno, that no other man of the Trojans shall be carried by these horses:
but I declare that thou shalt entirely have the glory of them."

Thus he spoke, and indeed swore a vain oath;[351] nevertheless he
encouraged him. Immediately he threw around his shoulders his crooked
bow, and put on above the hide of a grey wolf, with a casque of
weasel-skin upon his head; and seized a sharp javelin. And he set out to
go from the camp towards the ships: nor was he destined to bring back
intelligence to Hector, returning from the ships. But when now he had
quitted the crowd of horses and men, he eagerly held on his way. But him
godlike Ulysses observed advancing, and addressed Diomede:

   [Footnote 351: "There is no necessity for supposing that Hector
   meditated any deceit. The poet contemplates the event, which
   frustrated his hopes, and rendered his oath nugatory."--Kennedy.]

"Hark! Diomede, a man comes from the camp; I know not whether as a spy
upon our vessels, or to plunder some of the dead bodies. But let us
suffer him first to pass by a little through the plain, and afterwards,
hastily rushing upon him, let us take him. If, however, he surpasses us
in speed, attacking him with the spear, let us continually drive him
from the camp towards the ships, lest by chance he escape towards the
city."

Then having thus spoken, they lay down out of the pathway among the
dead; but he, in thoughtlessness, ran hastily past. But when now he was
as far off as is the space ploughed at one effort[352] by mules (for
they are preferable to oxen in drawing the well-made plough through the
deep fallow), they indeed ran towards him; but he stood still, hearing a
noise; for he hoped within his mind that his companions had come from
the Trojans to turn him back, Hector having ordered. But when now they
were distant a spear's cast, or even less, he perceived that they were
enemies, and moved his active knees to fly; and they immediately
hastened to follow. As when two rough-toothed hounds, skilled in the
chase, ever incessantly pursue through the woody ground either a fawn or
hare, whilst screaming it flies before; thus did Tydides and Ulysses,
sacker of cities, pursue him ever steadily, having cut him off from his
own people. But when now flying towards the ships, he would speedily
have mingled with the watch, then indeed Minerva infused strength into
Tydides, that none of the brazen-mailed Greeks might be beforehand in
boasting that he had wounded him, but he himself come second; then
gallant Diomede, rushing on him with his spear, addressed him:

"Either stop, or I will overtake thee with my spear; nor do I think that
thou wilt long escape certain destruction from my hand."

   [Footnote 352: See the Scholiast, and Kennedy's note.]

He said, and hurled his spear, but intentionally missed the man. Over
the right shoulder the point of the well-polished spear stuck in the
ground. Then indeed he stood still, and trembled, stammering (and there
arose a chattering of the teeth in his mouth), pale through fear.
Panting they overtook him, and seized his hands; but he weeping, spoke
thus:

"Take me alive, and I will ransom myself; for within [my house] I have
brass, and gold, and well-wrought iron; from which my father will bestow
upon you countless ransoms, if he shall hear that I am alive at the
ships of the Greeks."

But him much-planning Ulysses answering addressed: "Take courage, nor
suffer death at all to enter thy mind; but come, tell me this, and state
it correctly: Why comest thou thus alone from the camp towards the
fleet, through the gloomy night, when other mortals sleep? Whether that
thou mightst plunder any of the dead bodies, or did Hector send thee
forth to reconnoitre everything at the hollow ships? Or did thy mind
urge thee on?"

But him Dolon then answered, and his limbs trembled under him: "Contrary
to my wish, Hector hath brought me into great detriment, who promised
that he would give me the solid-hoofed steeds of the illustrious son of
Peleus, and his chariot adorned with brass. And he enjoined me, going
through the dark and dangerous[353] night, to approach the enemy, and
learn accurately whether the swift ships be guarded as before, or
whether, already subdued by our hands, ye plan flight with yourselves,
nor choose to keep watch during the night, overcome by severe toil."

   [Footnote 353: Buttm. Lexil. p. 369: "I translate θοὴ νύξ by _the
   quick and fearful_ night; and if this be once admitted as the
   established meaning of the Homeric epithet, it will certainly be
   always intelligible to the hearer and full of expression.
   'Night,' says a German proverb, 'is no man's friend;' the dangers
   which threaten the nightly wanderer are formed into a quick,
   irritable, hostile goddess. Even the other deities are afraid of
   her, who is (Il. Θ, 259) θεῶν δμήτειρα καὶ ἀνδρῶν; and Jupiter
   himself, in the midst of his rage, refrains from doing what might
   be νυκτὶ θοὴ ἀποθύμια. Nor is the epithet less natural when the
   night is not personified: for as ὀξεῖς καιροί are _dangerous_
   times, so by this word θοή it may be intended to mark the
   swiftness and imminency of dangers which threaten men who go διὰ
   νύκτα μέλαιναν."]

But him crafty Ulysses smiling addressed: "Assuredly thy mind aimed at
mighty gifts, the horses of warlike Æacides; but these are difficult to
be governed by mortal men, and to be driven by any other than Achilles,
whom an immortal mother bore. But come, tell me this, and state
correctly; where now, when coming hither, didst thou leave Hector, the
shepherd of the people? Where lie his martial arms, and where his
steeds? And how [stationed are] the watches and tents of the other
Trojans? What do they consult among themselves? Do they meditate to
remain there at a short distance from the ships, or will they return
again to the city, since, forsooth, they have subdued the Greeks?"

But him Dolon, the son of Eumedes, again addressed: "Therefore will I
indeed detail these things to thee very correctly. Hector, with those,
as many as are counsellors, is deliberating upon plans at the tomb of
divine Ilus, apart from the tumult: but for the watches of which thou
inquirest, O Hero, no chosen [band] defends or watches the camp. But as
many as are the hearths of fires among the Trojans, those at them are
they to whom there is compulsion;[354] and they are both wakeful, and
exhort one another to keep watch. But the allies, on the contrary,
summoned from afar, are sleeping; for they commit it to the Trojans to
keep watch, for their children and wives lie not near them."

   [Footnote 354: Construe, κατὰ τόσας μὲν πυρὸς ἐσχάρας, ὅσαι
   ἰισὶ Τρώων, οἵδε οἶσιν ἀνάγκη ἐστὶν, ἐγρηγόρθασι, κ. τ. λ.]

But him much-planning Ulysses answering addressed: "In
what manner now do they sleep: mingled with the horse-breaking
Trojans, or apart? Tell me, that I may know."

But him Dolon, the son of Eumedes, answered: "Therefore will I indeed
detail these things also very correctly. On the one hand, towards the
sea, [are] the Carians and Pœonians, armed with crooked bows, the
Lelegans, and Cauconians, and noble Pelasgians. Towards Thymbra, on the
other, the Lycians are allotted their place, and the haughty Mysians,
the horse-breaking Phrygians, and the Mæonian cavalry[355] warriors. But
why inquire ye of me these things separately? For if ye are now eager to
penetrate the host of the Trojans, those Thracians lately arrived are
apart, the last of all the others. And among them is their king Rhesus,
son of Eioneus. And his horses are the most beautiful and largest I have
seen. They are whiter than snow, and like to the winds in speed. And his
chariot is well adorned with both gold and silver; and he himself came,
wearing golden armour of mighty splendour, a marvel to behold; which
does not indeed suit mortal men to wear, but the immortal gods. But now
remove me to the swift ships, or, having bound me with a cruel bond,
leave me here until ye return, and make trial of me, whether I have
indeed spoken to you truly, or not."

   [Footnote 355: _I.e._ charioteers.]

But him then valiant Diomede sternly regarding, addressed: "Think not
within thy mind to escape from me, O Dolon, although thou hast reported
good tidings, since thou hast once come into my hands. For if indeed we
shall now release thee, or set thee at liberty, hereafter thou wouldst
surely return to the swift ships of the Achæans, either in order to
become a spy, or to fight against us. But if, subdued by my hands, thou
lose thy life, thou wilt not ever afterwards be a bane to the Greeks."

He said; and the other was preparing to supplicate him, taking him by
the chin with his strong hand; but he, rushing at him with his sword,
smote the middle of his neck, and cut through both the tendons; and the
head of him, still muttering, was mingled with the dust. From his head
they took the weasel-skin helmet, and the wolf skin, with the bent bow
and long spear; and noble Ulysses raised them on high with his hand to
Minerva, the goddess of plunder, and praying, spake:

"Rejoice, O goddess, in these, for thee, first of all the immortals in
Olympus, do we invoke; but guide us likewise to the horses and tents of
the Thracian men."

Thus he said; and raising them high above himself, he hung them on a
tamarisk-branch. But beside it he placed a conspicuous mark, pulling up
handfuls of reeds,[356] and the wide-spreading branches of the tamarisk,
lest they should escape their notice whilst they were returning through
the dark and dangerous night. Then both advanced onwards through arms
and black blood; and proceeding, they came immediately to the band of
the Thracian heroes. But they were sleeping, overpowered with fatigue;
and their beautiful armour lay upon the ground beside them, carefully in
order, in three rows: and by each of them [stood] a yoke of horses.
Rhesus slept in the midst, and beside him his swift horses were fastened
by the reins to the outer rim[357] of the chariot. And Ulysses first
observing, pointed him out to Diomede:

"This [is] the man, O Diomede, and these [are] the horses, which Dolon,
whom we slew, pointed out to us. But come now, exert thy mighty
strength; nor does it at all become thee to stand leisurely with thy
armour. Loose therefore the steeds, or do thou slay the men, and the
horses shall be my care."

   [Footnote 356: Συμμάρψας. Ernesti says: "Confregit leviter
   arundines, et addidit similiter confractis myricæ frondibus."]

   [Footnote 357: Ernesti regards ἐπιδιϕριάδος as an adjective, with
   ἄντυγος understood.]

Thus he spoke; but into him azure-eyed Minerva breathed valour, and he
slaughtered, turning himself on every side, and a dreadful groaning
arose of those smitten with the sword; and the earth grew red with
blood. As when a lion, coming upon unprotected flocks of goats or sheep,
rushes upon them, designing evils, so fell the son of Tydeus upon the
Thracian men, until he had slain twelve. But much-counselling
Ulysses--whomsoever Diomede standing beside struck with the sword--him
Ulysses dragged backwards, seizing by the foot; meditating these things
in his mind, that the fair-maned steeds should pass through easily, nor
should tremble in spirit, treading on the corses; for as yet they were
unused to them. But when now the son of Tydeus had reached the king,
him, the thirteenth, he deprived of sweet life, panting; for by the
counsel of Minerva an evil dream had stood over his head during the
night, [in likeness of] the son of Œneus: but in the meantime patient
Ulysses was untying the solid-hoofed steeds. With the reins he bound
them together and drove them from the crowd, lashing them with his bow,
because he thought not of taking with his hands the splendid lash from
the well-wrought chariot seat; and then he whistled as a signal to noble
Diomede. But he remaining, was meditating what most daring deed he
should do; whether seizing the car, where lay the embroidered armour, he
should drag it out by the pole[358] or bear it away, raising it aloft;
or take away the life of more of the Thracians. Whilst he was revolving
these things within his mind, Minerva in the meantime standing near,
addressed noble Diomede:

"Be mindful now of a return to the hollow ships, O son of magnanimous
Tydeus, lest thou reach them, having been put to flight; or lest some
other god perchance arouse the Trojans."

   [Footnote 358: Understand κατὰ ῥυμοῦ.]

Thus she spoke; and he understood the voice of the goddess speaking, and
he quickly ascended the chariot. And Ulysses lashed on [the horses] with
his bow, and they fled to the swift ships of the Greeks.

Nor did silver-bowed Apollo keep a vain watch. When he beheld Minerva
accompanying the son of Tydeus, enraged with her, he descended into the
vast army of the Trojans, and roused Hippocoön, a counsellor of the
Thracians, the gallant cousin of Rhesus. And he, leaping up from sleep,
when he beheld the place empty where the fleet horses had stood, and the
men panting amidst the dreadful slaughter, immediately then wept aloud,
and called upon his dear companion by name. A clamour and immeasurable
tumult of the Trojans running together arose, and they looked with
wonder at the marvellous deeds, which men having perpetrated, had
returned to the hollow ships.

But when now they came where they had slain the spy of Hector, there
Ulysses, dear to Jove, reined in his fleet steeds. But the son of
Tydeus, leaping to the ground, placed the bloody spoils in the hands of
Ulysses, and then ascended the chariot. And he lashed on the steeds, and
both, not unwilling, fled towards the hollow ships, for thither it was
agreeable to their minds [to go]. But Nestor first heard the sound, and
said:

"O friends, leaders and rulers over the Greeks, shall I speak falsely,
or say the truth? Still my mind impels me. The noise of swift-footed
steeds strikes upon my ears. O that now Ulysses and gallant Diomede
would immediately drive some solid-hoofed steeds from the Trojans! But
greatly do I fear in mind lest these bravest of the Greeks suffer aught
from the rude host of Trojans."

Not yet was the whole speech uttered, when they themselves arrived. Then
indeed they descended to the ground, and [their friends] rejoicing,
saluted them with the right hand and kind expressions. But [first] the
Gerenian knight Nestor asked them:

"Come, tell me, most excellent Ulysses, great glory of the Greeks, how
took ye these horses? [Whether] penetrating the camp of the Trojans; or
did some god, meeting, supply you with them? They are very like unto the
rays of the sun. I indeed always mingle with the Trojans, nor can I say
that I remain at the ships, although being an old warrior: yet have I
never beheld nor remarked such horses, but I think that some god,
meeting you, hath given them. For cloud-compelling Jove loves you both,
and the daughter of ægis-bearing Jove, azure-eyed Minerva."

But him crafty Ulysses answering addressed: "O Nestor, offspring of
Neleus, great glory of the Greeks, a god indeed, if willing, could
easily have given better horses even than these, since they (the gods)
are much more powerful. But those steeds about which thou inquirest, old
man, are Thracian, lately arrived, and valiant Diomede slew their lord,
and beside him twelve companions, all of the bravest. The thirteenth, a
spy, we killed, near the ships, whom Hector sent forth, and the other
illustrious Trojans, to be a spy, forsooth, [of our army]."

Thus saying, he drove the solid-hoofed steeds across the ditch,
exulting, and with him went the other Greeks rejoicing. But when they
came to the well-constructed tent of Diomede, they tied the steeds by
the skilfully-cut reins to the horses' stall, where stood the
swift-footed steeds of Diomede, eating sweet corn. In the stern of his
vessel Ulysses laid the bloody spoils of Dolon, until they could present
them as a sacred gift to Minerva. Then having gone into the sea, they
washed off the abundant sweat from around their legs, their neck, and
thighs. But when the wave of the sea had washed away the abundant sweat
from their bodies, and they were refreshed in their dear heart, entering
the well-polished baths, they bathed. But having bathed and anointed
themselves with rich oil, they sat down to a repast; and drawing forth
sweet wine from a full bowl, they poured it out in libation to Minerva.




                           BOOK THE ELEVENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Agamemnon distinguishes himself, but, being wounded, retires from the
field. Diomede is wounded by Paris: Ulysses by Socus. Ajax and Menelaus
then go to the relief of Ajax, and Eurypylus, who had joined them, is
shot in the thigh by Paris, who also wounds Machaon. Nestor conveys
Machaon from the field. Achilles sends Patroclus to the tent of Nestor,
who exhorts Patroclus to engage in battle, assuming the armour of
Achilles.


But Aurora was rising from her couch, from beside glorious Tithonus,
that she might bear light to immortals and to mortals, when Jove sent
forth fell Discord to the swift ships of the Greeks, bearing in her
hands the portent of war. And she stood upon the huge[359] black ship of
Ulysses, which was in the centre, to shout to both sides, as well to the
tents of Telamonian Ajax, as to those of Achilles; who had both drawn up
their equal ships at the very extremities, relying on their valour and
strength of hands. There standing, the goddess shouted both loudly and
terribly, in Orthian strain,[360] to the Greeks, and implanted mighty
strength in the heart of each, to war and fight incessantly. And
immediately war became more sweet to them, than to return in the hollow
ships to their dear fatherland. Then the son of Atreus shouted aloud,
and ordered the Greeks to be girded; and arrayed himself, putting on his
shining armour. First he put upon his legs his beautiful greaves, fitted
with silver clasps; next he placed around his breast a corslet which
Cinyras once gave him, to be a pledge of hospitality. For a great rumour
was heard at Cyprus, that the Greeks were about to sail to Troy in
ships: wherefore he gave him this, gratifying the king. Ten bars indeed
[of the corslet] were of dark cyanus[361], twelve of gold, and twenty of
tin; and three serpents of cyanus stretched towards the neck on each
side, like unto rainbows, which the son of Saturn hath fixed in a
cloud[362], a sign to articulate-speaking men. Then around his shoulders
he hung his sword, on which glittered golden studs; and a silver
scabbard enclosed it, fitted with golden rings. Next he took up his
shield, mortal-covering[363], variously wrought, strong, beautiful,
around which were ten brazen orbs. Upon it were twenty white bosses of
tin, and in the midst was [one] of dark cyanus. On it a grim-visaged
Gorgon was placed as an ornament, looking horribly, and around [were]
Terror and Flight. The belt was of silver, but round it a snake of
cyanus was twisted, and there were three heads entwined, springing from
one neck. Upon his head also he placed his helmet, adorned with studs on
all sides, having four bosses, crested with horse-hair, and dreadfully
nodded the tuft from above. He then took two strong spears, tipped with
brass, sharp; and the brass of them glittered afar, even to heaven: and
Minerva and Juno thundered above, honouring the king of Mycenæ, rich in
gold.

Then indeed each gave orders to his own charioteer to hold there his
horses in good order by the fosse; whilst they themselves on foot[364],
arrayed with their armour, rushed forth; and an inextinguishable clamour
arose before morning. And they[365] were marshalled in the foreground
with the cavalry at the trench; the cavalry followed at a little
interval; but the son of Saturn aroused a dreadful tumult, and sent down
dew-drops, moist with blood, from the air above, because he was about to
hurl many brave souls on to Hades.

On the other side, on the contrary, the Trojans [drew up] on a hill in
the plain around both mighty Hector, blameless Polydamas, and Æneas,
who, among the Trojans, was honoured by the people as a god; and the
three sons of Antenor, Polybus, noble Agenor, and youthful Acamas, like
unto the immortals. And Hector in the van carried his shield, equal on
all sides. And as when a pernicious star makes its appearance from the
clouds, at one time shining, and dark again hath entered the clouds; so
Hector, giving orders, appeared now among the first, and now among the
last; and he glittered all over with brass, like the lightning of
ægis-bearing Jove.

   [Footnote 359: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 378, sqq.]

   [Footnote 360: _I. e._ shrill, at the full pitch of the voice.
   Cf. Æsch. Pers. Μολπηδὸν ηὐϕήμησεν, ὄρθιον δ' ἄμα Άντηλάλαξε.]

   [Footnote 361: I have retained this word, as we cannot ascertain
   what precise metal is meant.]

   [Footnote 362: Cf. Genes. ix. 13.]

   [Footnote 363: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 33.]

   [Footnote 364: Cf. Hesych. t. i. p. 1065, with Alberti's note.]

   [Footnote 365: I. e. the chiefs.]

And they,--as when reapers opposite to each other form swathes of wheat
or barley along the field of a rich man, and the frequent handfuls
fall,--so the Trojans and Greeks, rushing against one another, kept
slaughtering: and neither thought of pernicious flight. And they held
their heads equal in combat, and rushed on like wolves; whilst
lamentable Discord, looking on, exulted: for she alone of the gods was
present with them contending. But the other gods were not present with
them, but sat quiet in their palaces, where beautiful mansions were
built for each, along the summits of Olympus. All however blamed the
Saturnian collector of dark clouds, because he wished to afford glory to
the Trojans. But the sire did not regard them, but retiring by himself,
sat down apart from the others, exulting in glory, looking both upon the
city of the Trojans, and the ships of the Greeks, and the brightness of
armour, and the slaying, and slain.

Whilst it was morn, and the sacred day was increasing, so long the
weapons reached both sides, and the people fell. But at the time when
the wood-cutter[366] has prepared his repast in the dells of a mountain,
when he has wearied his hands hewing down lofty trees, and satiety comes
upon his mind, and the desire of sweet food seizes his breast; then the
Greeks, by their valour, broke the phalanxes, cheering their companions
along the ranks. But Agamemnon first leaped forth, and slew the hero
Bianor, the shepherd of the people, and then also his companion, Oïleus,
the goader of steeds. For he then, leaping from the chariot, stood
against him; but he (Agamemnon) smote him, as he was rushing straight
forward, with his sharp spear, in the forehead; nor did the visor, heavy
with brass, retard the weapon, but it penetrated both it and the bone,
and all the brain within was stained with gore. Him then he subdued
while eagerly rushing on. And Agamemnon, king of men, left them there
with their bosoms all bare, for he had stripped off their tunics. Next
he went against Isus and Anthipus, two sons of Priam, [the one]
illegitimate, and [the other] legitimate, being both in one chariot, in
order to slay them. The spurious [son] guided the chariot, whilst
illustrious Antiphus fought. Them Achilles had once bound with tender
osiers on the summits of Ida, taking them while pasturing their sheep;
and had liberated them for a ransom. Then however the son of Atreus,
wide-ruling Agamemnon, struck one upon the breast above the pap with his
spear; and again he smote Antiphus beside the ear with his sword, and
hurled him from his chariot. Hastening up, he despoiled them of their
beautiful armour, recognizing them; for he had formerly seen them at the
swift ships, when swift-footed Achilles brought them from Ida. And as a
lion, returning to his lair, easily crushes the little fawns of the
fleet hind, seizing them in his strong teeth, and deprives them of their
tender life, whilst she, although she happen [to be] very near, cannot
aid them; for a dreadful tremor comes upon herself; but hastening, she
immediately flies through the thick oak groves and the forest, sweating,
through the attack of the wild beast. Thus no one of the Trojans was
then able to avert destruction from these, but they themselves were put
to flight by the Greeks. Next [he attacked] Pisander and Hippolochus,
brave in battle, the sons of warlike Antimachus, who having accepted
gold from Paris, rich gifts, would not suffer them to restore Helen to
yellow-haired Menelaus. His two sons, then, Agamemnon, king of men,
seized, being in one chariot, for they drove their fleet horses
together; for the splendid reins had fallen from their hands, and they
were confounded. But the son of Atreus rushed against them like a lion,
and they, on the contrary, supplicated [him] from the chariot:

"Take us alive, O son of Atreus, and thou shalt receive worthy ransoms.
For many treasures lie in the houses of Antimachus, brass, gold, and
variously-wrought iron. From these would our father give infinite
ransoms, if he should hear that we were alive at the ships of the
Greeks."

   [Footnote 366: Compare the similar allusion to rustic pursuits in
   xvi. 779, with Buttm. Lexil. p. 89.]

Thus both weeping addressed the king with soothing words; but heard an
unsoothing reply: "If indeed ye be the sons of warlike Antimachus, who
once in an assembly of the Trojans, ordered that they should there put
to death Menelaus, coming as an ambassador along with godlike Ulysses,
and not send him back to the Greeks--now surely shall ye pay the penalty
of the unmerited insolence of your father."

He said, and hurled Pisander from his horses to the ground, striking him
on the breast with his spear; and he was stretched supine upon the soil.
But Hippolochus leaped down, whom next he slew upon the ground, having
lopped off his hands with his sword, and cut off his neck; and it (the
head) like a cylinder, he hurled forward, to be rolled through the
crowd. These then he left there; and where very many phalanxes were
thrown into confusion, there he rushed, and at the same time other
well-greaved Greeks. Infantry slew infantry, flying from necessity, and
horse [slew] horse, slaughtering with the brass (whilst the dust was
raised by them from the plain, which the loud-sounding feet of the
horses excited); but king Agamemnon, constantly slaying, pursued,
cheering on the Greeks. And as when a destructive fire falls upon a
woody forest, and the wind whirling carries it on all sides, whilst the
branches fall with the roots, overwhelmed by the violence of the flame;
so fell the heads of the flying Trojans, at the hand of Agamemnon, son
of Atreus, and many lofty-necked steeds rattled their empty chariots
through the ranks[367] of the battle, longing for their faultless
charioteers; but they lay upon the earth, far more agreeable to the
vultures than to their wives.

   [Footnote 367: Literally, "the bridges," _i. e._ the open spaces
   between the lines.]

But Jove withdrew Hector out of the reach of weapons, of dust, of
slaughter, blood and tumult, whilst Atrides pursued, loudly cheering on
the Danai. [The Trojans] meanwhile rushed through the middle of the
plain towards the wild fig-tree, near the tomb of Ilus, the descendant
of ancient Dardanus, eager to reach the city; but Atrides still followed
shouting, and stained his invincible hands with dusty gore. But when now
they reached the Scæan gates and the beech-tree, there at length they
halted, and awaited each other. Others, however, still fled through the
middle of the plain, like oxen which a lion, coming at the depth of
night, hath put tremblingly to flight--all, but to some one dreadful
destruction is apparent; whose neck he first completely breaks, seizing
it in his strong teeth; and then laps up both the blood and all the
entrails: thus did the son of Atreus, king Agamemnon, follow them,
always killing the hindermost; and they kept flying. Many fell prone and
supine from their chariots, by the hands of the son of Atreus; for
before [all others] he raged exceedingly with the spear. But when now he
was about soon to reach the city and the lofty wall, then indeed the
father both of men and gods, descending from heaven, seated himself upon
the tops of Ida, of many rills. And he held the lightning in his hands,
and aroused golden-winged Iris to bear his message:

"Come, swift Iris, deliver this message to Hector. As long as he may
behold Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people, raging in the van, [and]
destroying the ranks of men, so long let[368] him retreat, and let him
exhort the rest of the army to fight with the enemy during the violent
contest. But when he (Agamemnon) shall have mounted his steeds, either
smitten by a spear, or wounded by an arrow, then will I supply him with
strength to slay,[369] until he reach the well-benched ships, and the
sun set, and sacred darkness come on."

   [Footnote 368: Cf. ver. 204.]

   [Footnote 369: The Greeks.]

Thus he spake; nor did rapid Iris, swift as the wind on her feet,
disobey. But she descended from the mountains of Ida, towards sacred
Ilium. She found noble Hector, son of warlike Priam, standing in the
midst of the horses and well-joined chariots: and having approached,
swift-footed Iris addressed him:

"Hector, son of Priam, equal in counsel to Jove, Jove hath sent me
forward to deliver to thee this message: As long as thou seest
Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people, raging amongst the van, [and]
destroying the ranks of men, so long do thou abstain from combat, but
exhort the rest of the army to fight with the enemy during the violent
contest. But when he shall have mounted his steeds, either smitten with
a spear, or wounded by an arrow, then will he supply thee with strength
to slay, until thou reach the well-benched ships, and the sun set, and
sacred darkness come on."

Thus having spoken, swift-footed Iris departed. But Hector with his
armour sprang from his chariot to the ground, and brandishing sharp
spears, ranged through the army on every side, inciting them to fight,
and stirred up the dreadful battle. They indeed rallied, and stood
opposite to the Greeks; but the Greeks, on the other hand, strengthened
their phalanxes. And the battle was renewed, and they stood front to
front. But Agamemnon first rushed on, for he wished to fight far before
all.

Tell me now, ye muses, possessing Olympian dwellings, who first, either
of the Trojans or illustrious allies, now came against Agamemnon?
Iphidamas, son of Antenor, both valiant and great, who was nurtured in
fertile Thrace, the mother of flocks. Cisseus, his maternal grandfather,
who begat fair-cheeked Theano, reared him in his house whilst yet a
little boy: but when he had attained the measure of glorious youth, he
there detained him, and gave him his own daughter. And having married
her, he came from the bridal chamber, on the rumour of the Greeks, with
twelve curved vessels which followed him. The equal ships indeed he
afterwards left at Percote, but he, proceeding on foot, had arrived at
Troy; and he it was who then came against Agamemnon, the son of Atreus.
When these, advancing against each other, were now near, the son of
Atreus on his part missed, and his spear was turned aside. But Iphidamas
smote him upon the belt, under the corslet; and he put his strength to
it, relying on his strong hand. Yet he pierced not the flexible belt,
but meeting with the silver long before, the point was turned like lead.
Then indeed wide-ruling Agamemnon, seeing it in his hand, pulled it
towards him, exasperated, like a lion, and plucked it from his hand; and
he smote him on the neck with his sword, and relaxed his limbs. Thus he,
unhappy, while aiding his citizens, falling there, slept a brazen sleep,
away from his lawful virgin wife, whose charms he had not yet known,
although he had given many presents [for her].[370] First he gave a
hundred oxen, and then he promised a thousand goats and sheep together,
which were pastured for him in countless numbers. Him Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, at that time stripped [of his arms], and went through the army
of the Greeks, bearing his rich armour. Whom when Coon,[371] the eldest
born of Antenor, conspicuous amongst men, then beheld, violent grief
darkened his eyes, for his brother having fallen, and he stood aside
with his spear, escaping the notice of noble Agamemnon. And he wounded
him in the middle of the arm, below the elbow, and the point of the
shining spear passed right through to the other side. Then indeed
Agamemnon, the king of men, shuddered; but not even thus did he abstain
from battle or from war, but he rushed upon Coon, holding his
wind-nurtured spear.[372] He on his part was eagerly dragging by the
foot Iphidamas his brother, and begotten by the same father, and was
calling upon every brave man, when [Agamemnon] wounded him with his
polished brazen spear below the bossy shield, whilst dragging him
through the crowd, and relaxed his limbs; and, standing beside him, cut
off his head over Iphidamas. There the sons of Antenor, fulfilling their
destiny at the hands of the king, the son of Atreus, descended to the
abode of Hades. But he was ranging about through the ranks of other men,
with his spear, his sword, and huge stones, whilst the warm blood yet
oozed from his wound. When, however, the wound grew dry, and the blood
ceased [to flow], sharp pains possessed the strength of Atreus's son.
And as when the sharp pang seizes a woman in travail, piercing, which
the Ilithyiæ, daughters of Juno, who preside over childbirth, send
forth, keeping bitter pangs in their possession; so did sharp anguish
enter the strength of the son of Atreus. And he sprang into his chariot,
and ordered his charioteer to drive on to the hollow ships; for he was
tortured at heart. And vociferating, he shouted aloud to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders, and rulers over the Argives, repel ye now the
severe battle from the sea-traversing barks, since provident Jove does
not permit me to combat all day with the Trojans."

   [Footnote 370: On this custom, cf. ix. 146, xviii. 593.]

   [Footnote 371: The name and fate of this hero unclassically
   remind us of the "gone coon" of American celebrity, immortalized
   in the "at homes" of the late Charles Matthews.]

   [Footnote 372: "The Scholiasts and Eustathius explain this
   epithet by the received opinion that trees in exposed situations
   are usually the strongest and most vigorous from their frequent
   agitation by the wind."--Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke; and the charioteer lashed on the fair-maned steeds
towards the hollow ships; and they, not unwilling, flew. They were
covered with foam as to their breasts, and were sprinkled beneath with
dust, as they bore the afflicted king apart from the battle. But Hector,
when he observed Agamemnon going apart, exhorted both the Trojans and
Lycians, shouting aloud:

"Ye Trojans, Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my friends,
and be mindful of impetuous might. The bravest hero has departed, and
Saturnian Jove has given great glory to me. But straightway urge your
solid-hoofed horses against the gallant Greeks, that ye may bear off
higher glory."

Thus saying, he aroused the courage and spirit of each. As when
perchance some huntsman should urge his white-toothed dogs against a
rustic wild boar or lion; so Hector, the son of Priam, equal to
man-slaughtering Mars, urged the magnanimous Trojans against the Greeks.
He himself, having mighty courage, advanced among the first, and rushed
into the battle, like unto a storm blowing from above, and which rushing
down, stirs up the purple deep.

Then whom first and whom last, did Hector, son of Priam, slay, when Jove
gave him glory? Assæus indeed first, and Autonoüs, and Opites, and
Dolops, son of Clytis, and Opheltius, and Agelaus, and Æsymnus, and
Orus, and Hipponoüs, persevering in fight. These leaders of the Greeks
he then slew, and afterwards the common crowd; as when the west wind
drives to and fro the clouds of the impetuous[373] south, lashing them
with an impetuous blast, and many a swollen[374] billow is rolled along,
whilst the foam is scattered on high by the far-straying blast of the
wind; thus were many heads of the people subdued by Hector. Then indeed
would there have been ruin; and inevitable deeds had been done, and the
flying Greeks had fallen in flight into their ships, had not Ulysses
encouraged Diomede, the son of Tydeus:

"Son of Tydeus, through what cause are we forgetful of impetuous might?
But come hither, my friend, stand by me; for surely it will be a
disgrace if indeed crest-tossing Hector take the ships."

Him then valiant Diomede, answering, addressed: "I indeed will remain,
and be courageous; although there will be little use[375] for us, since
cloud-compelling Jove chooses to give glory to the Trojans rather than
to us."

   [Footnote 373: Or "serenizing, causing a clear sky." Heyne
   compares "albus notus," in Horace. But see Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 374: Neuter of the Ionic adjective τρόϕις=μέγας,
   εὐτραϕής.]

   [Footnote 375: Hesychius: Ἦδος· ἡδονή, κα ὄϕελος.]

He said, and hurled Thymbræus from his chariot to the ground, striking
him with his spear upon the left pap; but Ulysses [slew] Molion, the
godlike attendant of the king. These then they left, since they caused
them to cease from war. Then both, advancing through the multitude,
excited confusion; as when two boars, full of courage, rush upon the
hounds; so they returning to the fight, cut down the Trojans; and the
Greeks joyfully gained a respite, avoiding noble Hector. Next they took
a chariot and two warriors, the bravest of the people, the two sons of
Percosian Merops, who above all was skilled in augury, nor would permit
his sons to march to the man-destroying war: yet did they not obey him,
because the destinies of black death led them on. Them spear-renowned
Diomede, the son of Tydeus, depriving of life and breath, despoiled of
their splendid armour. And Ulysses slew Hippodamus and Hyperochus.

Then the son of Saturn, looking down from Ida, stretched for them the
contest with equal tension, and they slaughtered one another. The son of
Tydeus indeed wounded on the hip, with his spear, the hero Agastrophus,
son of Pæon; for his horses were not at hand for him to take flight; but
he had erred greatly in his mind, for his attendant kept them apart,
whilst he rushed on foot through the foremost combatants, till he lost
his life. But Hector quickly perceived it along the ranks, and hastened
towards them, shouting; and with him followed the phalanxes of the
Trojans. Diomede, brave in the din of battle, beholding him, shuddered,
and immediately addressed Ulysses, who was near:

"Towards us is this great destruction, dreadful Hector, now rolled. But
come, let us stand firm, and awaiting, repulse [him]."

He said, and brandishing his long-shadowed spear, hurled it, and smote
him on the summit of the helmet on his head; nor, aiming did he miss.
But brass wandered from brass, nor did it reach the white skin; for the
threefold oblong helmet stopped it, which Phœbus Apollo had given him.
Hector hastily retired to a distance, and was mingled with the crowd.
And he (Hector) falling upon his knee, remained so, and supported
himself with his strong hand against the earth, whilst dark night
overshadowed his eyes. But whilst the son of Tydeus was following after
the impulse of the spear far through the foremost combatants, where it
was fixed in the earth, Hector, in the meantime, breathed again, and
springing again into his chariot, drove into the crowd, and avoided
black death. And valiant Diomede, rushing upon him with his spear,
addressed him:

"Dog, thou hast escaped indeed death at present, although destruction
approached near thee. Now again has Phœbus Apollo rescued thee, to whom
thou art wont to offer prayers, advancing into the clash of spears. But
I will assuredly make an end of thee, meeting thee again, if perchance
any one of the gods be an ally to me. Now, however, I will go against
others, whomsoever I can find."

He said, and slew the spear-renowned son of Pæon. But Paris, the husband
of fair-haired Helen, leaning against a pillar, at the tomb of the
deceased hero, Dardanian Ilus, the aged leader of the people, bent his
bow against the son of Tydeus, the shepherd of the people. Whilst he was
removing the variegated corslet from the breast of gallant Agastrophus,
the shield from his shoulders, and his heavy casque, he (Paris) in the
meantime was drawing back the horn of his bow, and struck him on the
broad part of the right foot, nor did the weapon escape in vain from his
hand; and the arrow went entirely into the ground. And he, laughing very
joyfully, sprang from his ambuscade, and boasting, spoke:

"Thou art struck, nor has the weapon escaped me in vain. Would that,
striking thee in the lower part of the groin, I had deprived thee of
life. Thus, indeed, would the Trojans have respired from destruction,
who now are thrilled with horror at thee, as bleating goats at the
lion."

But him valiant Diomede, undismayed, addressed:

"Archer, reviler, decked out with curls, woman's man, if now in arms
thou wouldst make trial of me, hand to hand, thy bow should not avail
thee, and numerous arrows[376] whereas now, having grazed the broad part
of my foot, thou boastest thus. I regard it not, as though a woman had
wounded me, or a silly boy: for idle is the weapon of an unwarlike,
good-for-nothing man. From me, indeed, it is otherwise; for if one be
touched but slightly, the weapon is piercing, and forthwith renders him
lifeless; and the cheeks of his wife are furrowed on both sides, and his
children are orphans; but crimsoning the earth with his blood, he
putrefies, and the birds around him are more numerous than the women."

   [Footnote 376: Cf. iii. 39, sqq.; Hor. Od. i. 15, 13.]

Thus he spoke; but spear-renowned Ulysses coming near, stood before him,
and he (Diomede) sitting down behind him, drew the swift shaft out of
his foot, and severe agony darted through his body. Then he leaped into
his chariot, and commanded his charioteer to drive to the hollow ships;
for he was grieved at heart. But spear-renowned Ulysses was left alone,
nor did any of the Greeks remain beside him, as fear had seized upon
all. Wherefore, groaning inwardly, he addressed his own mighty soul:

"Alas! what will become of me? Great would be the disgrace if I fly,
alarmed at the multitude; but worse would it be if I were taken alone:
but the son of Saturn hath struck the rest of the Greeks with terror.
But wherefore does my spirit discuss these things with me? for I know
that cowards indeed retire from the battle; but whosoever should be
brave in combat, it is altogether necessary that he stand firmly,
whether he be wounded, or wound another."

Whilst he revolved these things within his mind and soul, the ranks of
the shielded Trojans in the meantime came upon him, and enclosed him in
the midst, placing [their] bane in the midst of them. As when dogs and
vigorous youths rush against a boar on all sides, but he comes out from
a deep thicket, sharpening his white tusk within his crooked jaws; on
all sides they rush upon him, and a gnashing of teeth arises: but they
remain at a distance from him, terrible as he is: so the Trojans did
rush round Ulysses, dear to Jove. But he wounded above the shoulder
blameless Deïopites, springing upon him with his sharp spear; and
afterwards he slew Thoön and Ennomous. With his spear he next wounded
Chersidamas, when leaping from his chariot, in the navel, below his
bossed shield; but he, falling amid the dust, grasped the earth with the
hollow of his hand. These indeed he left, and next wounded with his
spear Charops, son of Hippasus, and brother of noble Socus. But Socus,
godlike hero, hastened to give him aid; and approaching very near, he
stood, and addressed him in these words:

"O illustrious Ulysses, insatiable in crafts and toil, to-day shalt
thou either boast over the two sons of Hippasus, having slain such
heroes, and stripped them of their arms, or else stricken by my spear,
thou shalt lose thy life."

Thus saying, he smote him upon the shield equal on all sides. The rapid
weapon penetrated the shining shield, and was fixed through the
curiously-wrought corslet, and tore off all the skin from his sides. But
Pallas Minerva suffered it not to be mingled with the entrails of the
hero. And Ulysses perceived that the weapon had not come upon him
mortally, and retiring, he addressed [this] speech to Socus:

"Ah! wretch; very soon indeed will dreadful destruction overtake thee.
Without doubt thou hast caused me to cease from fighting with the
Trojans, but I declare that death and black fate shall be thine this
day; and that, subdued beneath my spear, thou shalt give glory to me,
and thy soul to steed-famed Pluto." [377]

   [Footnote 377: Probably so called from the steeds ("inferni
   raptoris equos," Claud. de Rapt. Pros. i. 1) by which he stole
   away Proserpine. See the Scholiast.]

He said, and the other, turning again to flight, had begun to retreat,
but whilst he was turning, he (Ulysses) fixed his spear in his back
between the shoulders, and drove it through his breast. Falling, he made
a crash, and noble Ulysses boasted over him:

"O Socus, son of warlike, horse-breaking Hippasus, the end of death has
anticipated thee, nor hast thou escaped. Ah! wretch, neither thy father
nor venerable mother shall close thine eyes for thee, dead as thou art,
but ravenous birds shall tear thee, flapping about thee with dense
wings: but when I die, the noble Greeks will pay me funeral honours."

So saying, he plucked the strong spear of warlike Socus out of his flesh
and bossy shield; and his blood gushed forth as he drew it out, and
tortured his mind. But the magnanimous Trojans, when they beheld the
blood of Ulysses, encouraging one another through the crowd, all rushed
on against him; whilst he kept retreating backwards, and called to his
companions. Thrice did he then shout as much as the head of mortal could
contain, and thrice warlike Menelaus heard him exclaiming, and instantly
addressed Ajax, being near:

"Most noble Ajax, son of Telamon, chieftain of the people, the cry of
invincible Ulysses has come upon me, like to that, as if the Trojans
were greatly pressing upon him, being alone, having cut him off in the
sharp fight. Wherefore let us go through the crowd, as it is better to
aid him. I fear lest being left alone amidst the Trojans, he suffer
aught, although being brave, and there be great want [of him] to the
Greeks."

Thus speaking, he led the way, and the godlike hero followed along with
him. Then they found Ulysses, dear to Jove; and around him followed the
Trojans, like tawny jackals round an antlered stag when wounded in the
mountains, which a man hath stricken with an arrow from the bowstring.
Him indeed, flying, it escapes on its feet, as long as the blood is
warm, and its knees have the power of motion. But when the swift arrow
hath subdued it, the raw-devouring jackals destroy it in a shady grove
among the mountains. Chance, however, brings thither the destructive
lion: the jackals then fly in terror, and he devours. So at that time
followed the Trojans, numerous and brave, round warlike, crafty Ulysses;
but the hero, rushing on with his spear, warded off the merciless day.
Then Ajax came near, bearing his shield, like a tower, and stood beside
him; and the Trojans fled, terrified, different ways. In the meantime
warlike Menelaus, taking him by the hand, withdrew [him] from the
throng, till his attendant drove his horses near. But Ajax, springing
upon the Trojans, slew Doryclus, son of Priam, an illegitimate son; and
next wounded Pandocus. Lysander he wounded, and Pyrasus, and Pylartes.
And as when an overflowing river comes down on the plain, a torrent from
the mountains, accompanied by the shower of Jove, and bears along with
it many dry oaks and many pines, and casts forth the swollen torrent
into the sea; so illustrious Ajax, routing [them], pursued [them] along
the plain, slaughtering both horses and men. Nor as yet had Hector heard
it; for he was fighting on the left of the battle, on the banks of the
river Scamander; for there chiefly fell the heads of men, and an
inextinguishable clamour had arisen around mighty Nestor, and warlike
Idomeneus. Among these did Hector mingle, performing arduous deeds with
his spear and equestrian skill, and he was laying waste the phalanxes of
youths. Nevertheless the noble Greeks would not have retired from the
way, had not Paris, the husband of fair-haired Helen, disabled Machaon,
the shepherd of the people, performing prodigies of valour, wounding him
on the right shoulder with a triple-barbed arrow. For him then the
valour-breathing Greeks trembled, lest perchance they should slay him,
the battle giving way, and immediately Idomeneus addressed noble Nestor:

"O Neleian Nestor, great glory of the Greeks, come, ascend thy chariot,
and let Machaon mount beside thee; and direct thy solid-hoofed horses
with all speed towards the ships, for a medical man is equivalent to
many others, both to cut out arrows, and to apply mild remedies." [378]

   [Footnote 378: Scribonius Largus, Compos. Med. cc. "Neque
   chirurgia sine diætetica, neque hæc sine chirurgia, id est, sine
   ea parte quæ medicamentorum utilium usum habeat, perfici possunt;
   sed aliæ ab aliis adjuvantur, et quasi consumantur." Where John
   Rhodius well observes: "Antiquos chirurgos Homerus Chironis
   exemplo herbarum succis vulnera sanasse memorat. Hunc et
   sectiones adhibuisse notat Pindarus Pyth. Od. iii. Neque
   ingeniorum fons Ιλ. Λ. τὸ ἐκτάμνειν omisit." Cf. Celsus, Pref.
   with the notes of Almeloveen, and lib. vii. præf., where the
   chirurgical part of ancient medicine is amusingly discussed.]

Thus he spoke, nor did the Gerenian knight Nestor disobey. Forthwith he
ascended his chariot, and Machaon, the son of Æsculapius, blameless
physician, mounted beside him; but he lashed on the steeds, and they
flew not unwillingly towards the hollow ships, for there it was
agreeable to their inclination [to go].

But Cebriones, sitting beside Hector, perceived the Trojans in
confusion, and addressed him in [these] words: "Hector, we two are
mingling here with the Greeks in the outskirt of evil-sounding battle,
whilst the other Trojans are thrown into confusion in crowds, both their
horses and themselves. Telamonian Ajax is routing them, for I know him
well, for around his shoulders he bears a broad shield. But let us also
direct our horses and chariot thither, where cavalry and infantry,
having engaged in the evil strife, are slaughtering each other, and
inextinguishable tumult hath arisen."

Thus then having spoken, he lashed on the fair-maned steeds with his
shrill-cracking lash. But they, sensible of the stroke, speedily bore
the swift chariot through Trojans and Greeks, trampling on both corses
and shields. With blood the whole axletree was stained beneath, and the
rims around the chariot-seat, which the drops from the horses' hoofs,
and from the wheel-tires, spattered. But he longed to enter the crowd of
heroes, and to break through, springing upon them. And he sent
destructive tumult upon the Greeks, and abstained very little from the
spear. Among the ranks of other men indeed he ranged with his spear, his
sword, and with huge stones; but he shunned the conflict of Telamonian
Ajax.

But lofty-throned Jove excited fear within Ajax, and he stood
confounded, and cast behind him his shield of seven bulls' hides.
Panic-struck he retired, gazing on all sides like a wild beast, turning
to and fro, slowly moving knee after knee. As when dogs and rustic men
drive a ravening lion from the stall of oxen, who, keeping watch all
night, do not allow him to carry off the fat of their cattle, but he,
eager for their flesh, rushes on, but profits nought, for numerous
javelins fly against him from daring hands, and blazing torches, at
which he trembles, although furious; but in the morning he stalks away
with saddened mind: so Ajax, sad at heart, then retired, much against
his will, from the Trojans; for he feared for the ships of the Greeks.
And as when a stubborn ass, upon whose sides[379] many sticks have
already been broken, entering in, browses on the tall crop, but the boys
still beat him with sticks, although their strength is but feeble, and
with difficulty drive him out, when he is satiated with food, so then at
length the magnanimous Trojans and far-summoned allies continually
followed Ajax, the mighty son of Telamon, striking the middle of his
shield with missile weapons. And Ajax, sometimes wheeling about, was
mindful of impetuous might, and checked the phalanxes of the
horse-breaking Trojans, but again he would turn himself to fly. But he
prevented all from advancing to the swift ships, whilst standing himself
between the Trojans and Greeks he raged impetuously. And spears hurled
against him from daring hands, stuck, some indeed in his ample shield,
and many, though eager to glut themselves with his flesh, stood fixed in
the ground between, before they could reach his fair skin.

   [Footnote 379: Such seems to be the force of ἀμϕίς]

Whom when Eurypylus, the illustrious son of Evæmon, perceived pressed
hard with many darts, advancing he stood beside him, and took aim with
his shining spear; and smote Apisaon, son of Phausias, shepherd of the
people, in the liver, under the diaphragm; and immediately relaxed his
limbs. And when godlike Alexander observed him stripping off the armour
of Apisaon, he instantly bent his bow against Eurypylus, and smote him
with an arrow upon the right thigh; and the reed was broken, and pained
his thigh. Then he fell back into the column of his companions, avoiding
fate, and shouting, he cried with a loud voice to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders, and rulers over the Greeks, rallying, stand firm,
and ward off the merciless day from Ajax, who is hard pressed with
darts; nor do I think that he will escape from the dread-resounding
battle. But by all means stand firm round mighty Ajax, the son of
Telamon."

So spake the wounded Eurypylus, and they stood very near him, resting
their shields upon their shoulders, and lifting up their spears. But
Ajax came to meet them, and turning about, stood firm, when he reached
the body of his comrades. Thus they indeed combated like blazing fire.

In the meantime the Neleian steeds, sweating, bore Nestor from the
battle, and conveyed Machaon, the shepherd of the people. And noble
Achilles, swift of foot, looking forth, beheld him; for he stood upon
the prow of his great ship, gazing at the severe labour and lamentable
rout. Straightway he addressed Patroclus, his companion, calling [to
him] from the ship; and he, hearing him within the tent, came forth,
like unto Mars: but it was the beginning of misfortune to him. Him first
the gallant son of Menœtius addressed: "Why dost thou call me, Achilles,
and what need hast thou of me?"

But him swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed: "Noble son of
Menœtius, most dear to my soul, soon I think that the Greeks will stand
round my knees entreating, for a necessity no longer tolerable invades
them. But go now, Patroclus, dear to Jove, ask Nestor what man this is
whom he is carrying wounded from the battle. Behind, indeed, he wholly
resembles Machaon, the son of Æsculapius, but I have not beheld the
countenance of the man: for the horses passed by me, hastening onward."

Thus he spoke, and Patroclus was obedient to his dear comrade, and
hastened to run to the tents and ships of the Greeks.

But when they came to the tent of the son of Neleus, they themselves
descended to the fertile earth, and Eurymedon, the attendant of the old
man, unyoked the mares from the chariot; whilst they refreshed
themselves from the sweat upon their tunics,[380] standing towards the
breeze beside the shore of the sea, and afterwards, entering the tent,
they sat down upon couches. But for them fair-curled Hecamede prepared a
mixture, she whom the old man had brought from Tenedos, when Achilles
laid it waste, the daughter of magnanimous Arsinoüs, whom the Greeks
selected for him, because he surpassed all in counsel. First she set
forward for them a handsome, cyanus-footed, well-polished table; then
upon it a brazen tray, and on it an onion, a relish[381] for the
draught, as well as new honey, and beside it the fruit of sacred corn.
Likewise a splendid cup[382] near them, which the old man had brought
from home, studded with golden nails. Its handles were four, and around
each were two golden pigeons feeding, and under it were two bottoms.
Another indeed would have removed it with difficulty from the table,
being full; but aged Nestor raised it without difficulty. In it the
woman, like unto the goddesses, had mixed for them Pramnian wine, and
grated over it a goat's-milk cheese with a brazen rasp, and sprinkled
white flour upon it: then bade them drink, as soon as she had prepared
the potion. But when drinking they had removed parching thirst, they
amused themselves, addressing each other in conversation. And Patroclus
stood at the doors, a godlike hero.

   [Footnote 380: "Construe ἀπεψ· κατὰ τὸν ιδρῶχιτ. _I.e._
   refreshed--cooled--themselves, by standing in front of the breeze
   and drying off the perspiration with which their garments were
   saturated."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 381: Probably the onion acted as a stimulant to
   drinking, as anchovies and olives are now used.]

   [Footnote 382: It was an ἀμϕικύπελλον. Cf. i. 584, and Buttm.
   Lexil. p. 93. There were two doves round each handle, making
   eight in all.]

But the old man, perceiving him, rose from his splendid seat, and taking
him by the hand, led him, in, and bade him be seated. But Patroclus, on
the other side, declined, and uttered [this] reply:

"No seat [for me], O Jove-nurtured sage, nor wilt thou persuade me.
Revered and irascible[383] is he who sent me forth to inquire who this
man is whom thou leadest wounded; but even I myself know, for I perceive
Machaon, the shepherd of the people. Now, however, in order to deliver
my message, I will return again an ambassador to Achilles; for well dost
thou know, O Jove-nurtured sage, what a terrible man he is; soon would
he blame even the blameless."

   [Footnote 383: Or "respected," as the Oxford translator renders
   it.]

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "But why indeed does
Achilles thus compassionate the sons of the Greeks, as many as have been
wounded with weapons? Nor knows he how great sorrow hath arisen
throughout the army; for the bravest lie in the ships, smitten in the
distant or the close fight.[384] Stricken is brave Diomede, the son of
Tydeus, and wounded is spear-renowned Ulysses, as well as Agamemnon.
Eurypylus also has been wounded in the thigh with an arrow; and this
other have I lately brought from battle, smitten with an arrow from the
bowstring: yet Achilles, being brave, regards not the Greeks, nor pities
them. Does he wait until the swift ships near the sea, contrary to the
will of the Greeks, be consumed with the hostile fire, and we ourselves
be slain one after the other? For my strength is not as it formerly was
in my active members. Would that I were thus young, and my might was
firm, as when a contest took place between the Eleans and us, about the
driving away some oxen, when, driving away in reprisal, I slew
Itymoneus, the valiant son of Hypeirochus, who dwelt in Elis: for he,
defending his cattle, was smitten among the first by a javelin from my
hand, and there fell; and his rustic troops fled on every side. And we
drove from the plain a very great booty, fifty droves of oxen, as many
flocks of sheep, as many herds of swine, and as many broad herds of
goats, one hundred and fifty yellow steeds, all mares, and beneath many
there were colts. And these we drove within Neleian Pylus, at night
towards the city; but Neleus was delighted in his mind, because many
things had fallen to my lot, going as a young man to the war. But with
the appearing morn, heralds cried aloud for those to approach to whom a
debt was due in rich Elis; and the leading heroes of the Pylians
assembling, divided [the spoil], (because the Epeans owed a debt to
many); for we in Pylus, [being] few, were overwhelmed with evil. For the
Herculean might, coming in former years, did us mischief, and as many as
were bravest were slain. For we, the sons of illustrious Neleus, were
twelve; of whom I alone am left, but all the rest have perished. Elated
at these things, the brazen-mailed Epeans, insulting us, devised wicked
deeds. But the old man chose for himself a herd of cattle and a large
flock of sheep, selecting three hundred and their shepherds; for even
to him a great debt was due in rich Elis: four horses, victorious in the
race, with their chariots, which had gone for the prizes; for they were
about to run for a tripod; but Augeas, king of men, detained them there,
and dismissed the charioteer, grieved on account of his steeds. At which
words and deeds the old man, being wroth, chose out for himself mighty
numbers, and gave the rest to the people to divide, that no one might go
away defrauded by him of his just proportion. We indeed accomplished
each of these things, and were performing sacrifices to the gods through
the city, when on the third day they all came at once, both the citizens
themselves and their solid-hoofed steeds, in full force: and with them
were armed the two Molions, being still youths, nor as yet very skilled
in impetuous might. There is a certain city, a lofty hill, Thryoëssa,
far away at the Alpheus, the last of sandy Pylus; this they invested,
eager to overthrow it. But when they had crossed the whole plain,
Minerva, hastening from Olympus, came to us by night as a messenger,
that we should be armed; nor did she assemble an unwilling people at
Pylus, but one very eager to fight. Still Neieus would not allow me to
be armed, but concealed my horses, for he said that I was not at all
acquainted with warlike deeds. Yet even thus was I conspicuous amongst
our cavalry, even although being on foot; for thus did Minerva conduct
me to battle. There is a certain river, Minyeïus, emptying itself into
the sea near Arena, where we, the Pylian horsemen, awaited divine Morn,
whilst the swarms of infantry poured in. Thence in full force, equipped
in armour, we came at mid-day to the sacred stream of Alpheus. There
having offered fair victims to almighty Jove, a bull to the Alpheus, and
a bull to Neptune, but an untrained heifer to blue-eyed Minerva, we then
took supper through the army by troops; and we each slept in our arms
along the river's stream. In the meantime the magnanimous Epeans stood
around, desirous to lay waste the city; but a mighty work of Mars first
appeared to them: for as soon as the splendid sun was elevated above the
earth, we were engaged in the battle, praying to Jove and to Minerva.
But when now the battle of the Pylians and Eleans began, I first slew a
man, the warrior Molion, and bore away his solid-hoofed steeds: he was
the son-in-law of Augeas, and possessed his eldest daughter,
yellow-haired Agamede, who well understood as many drugs as the wide
earth nourishes. Him advancing against [me], I smote with my brazen
spear. He fell in the dust, and springing into his chariot, I then stood
among the foremost combatants; but the magnanimous Epeans fled
terrified in different directions when they beheld the hero fallen, the
leader of their cavalry, he who was the best to fight. But I rushed upon
them like unto a black whirlwind; and I took fifty chariots, and in each
two men bit the ground with their teeth, vanquished by my spear. And now
indeed I should have slain the youthful Molions, the sons[385] of Actor,
had not their sire, wide-ruling Neptune, covering them with a thick
haze, preserved them from the war. Then Jove delivered into the hands of
the Pylians great strength, for so long did we follow them through the
long[386] plain, both slaying them, and gathering up rich armour, until
he had driven our horses to Buprasium, fertile in wheat, to the rock
Olenia and Alesium, where it is called Colone: whence Minerva turned
back the people. Then having killed the last man, I left him; but the
Greeks guided back their swift steeds from Buprasium to Pylus; and all
gave glory to Jove, of the gods, and to Nestor, of men. Thus was I, as
sure as ever I existed, among men: but Achilles will enjoy his valour
alone: surely I think that he will hereafter greatly lament, when the
people have bitterly perished. O my friend, Menœtius did assuredly thus
command thee on that day when he sent thee from Phthia to Agamemnon. For
we being both within, I and noble Ulysses, distinctly heard all things
in the halls, as he charged you: but we were come to the well-inhabited
palace of Peleus, collecting an army through fertile Greece. There then
we found the hero Menœtius within, as well as thee, and Achilles
besides; but the aged horseman, Peleus, was burning the fat thighs of an
ox to thunder-rejoicing Jove, within the enclosure[387] of his palace,
and held a golden cup, pouring the dark wine over the blazing sacrifice.
Both of you were then employed about the flesh of the ox, whilst we
stood in the vestibule; but Achilles, astonished, leaped up, and led us
in, taking us by the hand, and bade us be seated: and he set in order
before us the offerings of hospitality which are proper for guests. But
when we were satiated with eating and drinking, I began discourse,
exhorting you to follow along with us. Ye were both very willing, and
they both commanded you many things. Aged Peleus in the first place
directed his son Achilles ever to be the bravest, and to be conspicuous
above others; but to thee again Menœtius, the son of Actor, thus gave
charge: 'My son, Achilles indeed ia superior in birth; but thou art the
elder. And he is much superior in strength: but still do thou frequently
suggest to him proper advice, and admonish and direct him, and he will
surely be obedient in what is for [his own] good.' Thus did the old man
command thee; but thou art forgetful: but even now do thou mention
these things to warlike Achilles, if perchance he may be obedient. Who
knows if, advising him, thou mayest, with the gods' assistance, arouse
his mind? For the admonition of a friend is good. But if within his mind
he avoid some prophecy, and his venerable mother has told him anything
from Jove, let him at least send thee forth; and with thee let the other
forces of the Myrmidons follow, if indeed thou mayest be some aid to the
Greeks. Let him likewise give his beautiful armour to thee, to be borne
into battle, if perchance the Trojans, assimilating thee to him, may
abstain from the conflict, and the warlike sons of the Greeks, already
afflicted, may respire; and there be a little respite from
fighting.[388] But you, [who are] fresh, will, with fighting, easily
drive back men wearied, towards the city, from the ships and tents."

   [Footnote 384: Cf iv. 540, for the distinction between βεϑλημένοι
   and οὐτάμενοι.]

   [Footnote 385: _I. e._ the reputed sons.]

   [Footnote 386: See Schol. Etym. M. s.v., and Alberti on Hesych.
   t, ii. p. 1247]

   [Footnote 387: Properly, the fence or barrier of the enclosure.]

   [Footnote 388: There are several different interpretations for
   this line: 1. Schneider explains it: "They have but short time to
   respire; for if not at once assisted, they will be destroyed." 2.
   "Short will be the cessation from war." 3. "A cessation, or
   breathing-time, from war, although short, will be agreeable." 4.
   "Supply '_may be_', and translate, 'and that there _may be_ a
   short breathing-time from the battle;' although this last
   involves some tautology with the preceding line."--Ed. Dubl.]

Thus he spake, and he aroused the spirit within his breast; and he
hastened to run to the ships to Achilles, the grandson of Æacus. But
when now Patroclus, running, arrived at the ships of godlike Ulysses,
where were their forum and seat of justice, and there the altars of
their gods also were erected, there Eurypylus, the noble son of Evæmon,
wounded with an arrow in the thigh, limping from the battle, met him.
Down his back ran the copious sweat from his shoulders and head, and
from the grievous wound oozed the black blood; nevertheless his mind was
firm. Seeing him, the gallant son of Menœtius pitied him, and, grieving,
spoke winged words:

"Alas! unhappy men, leaders and rulers over the Greeks, are ye then thus
destined, far away from your friends and native land, to satiate the
swift dogs at Troy with your white fat? But come, tell me this, O
Jove-nurtured hero, Eurypylus, will the Greeks still at all sustain
mighty Hector, or will they now be destroyed, subdued by his spear?"

But him prudent Eurypylus in turn addressed: "No longer, Jove-nurtured
Patroclus, will there be aid for the Greeks, but they will fall back
upon the black ships. For already all, as many as were once bravest, lie
at the ships, stricken or wounded by the hands of the Trojans, whose
strength ever increases. But do thou now, indeed, save me, leading me to
my black ship; and cut out the arrow from my thigh, and wash the black
blood[389] from it with warm water; then sprinkle upon it mild drugs,
salubrious, which they say thou wert taught by Achilles, whom Chiron
instructed, the most just of the Centaurs. For the physicians,
Podalirius and Machaon, the one, I think, having a wound, lies at the
tents, and himself in want of a faultless physician, and the other
awaits the sharp battle of the Trojans upon the plain."

   [Footnote 389: Cf. Virg. Æn. x. 834: "Vulnera siccabat lymphis."
   The manner in which this was done is described by Celsus, v. 26:
   "Si profusionem timemus, siccis lineamentis vulnus implendum est,
   supraque imponenda gpongia ex aqua frigida expressa, ac manu
   super comprimenda." Cf. Athen. ii. 4.]

But him again the brave son of Menœtius addressed: "How then will these
things turn out? What shall we do, O hero Eurypylus? I go that I may
deliver a message to warlike Achilles, with which venerable Nestor,
guardian of the Greeks, has intrusted me: but even thus I cannot neglect
thee, afflicted."

He said, and having laid hold of the shepherd of the people under his
breast, bore him to the tent, and his attendant, when he saw him, spread
under him bulls' hides. There [Patroclus] laying him at length, cut out
with a knife the bitter, sharp arrow from his thigh, and washed the
black blood from it with warm water. Then he applied a bitter,
pain-assuaging root, rubbing it in his hands, which checked all his
pangs: the wound, indeed, was dried up, and the bleeding ceased.




                          BOOK THE TWELFTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

The Trojans assail the rampart, and Hector, despite an omen, which
Polydamas interprets unfavourably, attacks and forces the gate, and
opens a way to the ships.


Thus then at the tents the valiant son of Menœtius was healing the
wounded Eurypylus: but the Greeks and Trojans kept fighting in masses;
nor was the ditch of the Greeks destined to prove a barrier any longer,
and the wide wall from above, which they had erected in defence of the
ships; but they had drawn a foss around (nor had they given splendid
hecatombs to the gods); that it enclosing within, might defend the swift
ships and the great booty. But it was built against the will of the
immortal gods, therefore it remained not perfect for any long
period.[390] As long as Hector was alive, and Achilles indignant, and
the city of king Priam unravaged, so long was the mighty wall of the
Greeks firm. But when all the bravest of the Trojans were dead, and many
of the Greeks were subdued, but others left surviving, when in the tenth
year the city of Priam was sacked, and the Greeks went in their ships to
their dear fatherland; then at length Neptune and Apollo took counsel to
demolish the wall, introducing the strength of rivers, as many as flow
into the sea from the Idæan mountains, both the Rhesus and the
Heptaporus, the Caresus and the Rhodius, the Granicus and the Æsepus,
the divine Scamander and the Simoïs, where many shields and helmets fell
in the dust, and the race of demigod men. The mouths of all these Phœbus
Apollo turned to the same spot, and for nine days he directed their
streams against the wall; and Jove in the meantime rained continually,
that he might the sooner render the walls overwhelmed by the sea. But
the Earth-shaker [Neptune] himself, holding the trident in his hands,
led them on; and then dispersed among the billows all the foundations of
beams and stones which the Greeks had laid with toil. And he made [all]
level along the rapid Hellespont, and again covered the vast shore with
sands, having demolished the wall: but then he turned the rivers to go
back into their own channels, in which they had formerly poured their
sweet-flowing water.[391]

   [Footnote 390: Cf. Pseudo-Socrat. Epist. i. Πολλοῖς δὲ πολλὰ καὶ
   τῶν ἄλλων εἴρηται ποιητῶν περὶ θεῶν' καὶ ὅτι τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν
   αὐτῶν βούλησιν πραττόμενα ἐπὶ τὸ λώϊον ἐκθαίνει, τὰ δὲ παρὰ θεὸν
   ἀλυσιτελῆ ὑπάρχει τοῖς πράξασι, where Duport, p. 72, thinks there
   is a reference to the present passage.]

   [Footnote 391: On the present state of the Troad, which appears,
   from physical facts, to justify the mythical description of
   Homer,--see Heyne and Kennedy. Compare Virg. Æn. ii. 610, sqq.;
   Tryphiodor. 566, sqq. and 680, sqq.]

Thus were Neptune and Apollo about to act hereafter; but then the battle
and clamour burned around the well-built wall, and the stricken joists
of the towers resounded: but the Greeks, subdued by the scourge[392] of
Jove, were detained, hemmed in at the hollow ships, dreading Hector, the
furious cause of flight; for he fought, as formerly, equal to a
whirlwind. And as when a boar or lion is occupied amongst the dogs and
huntsmen, looking dreadfully with strength, and they, drawing themselves
up in a square form,[393] stand against him, and hurl frequent javelins
from their hands; but never is his noble heart alarmed, nor is he put to
flight; but his courage proves his death. And frequently he turns round,
trying the ranks of men; and wheresoever he has directed his attack,
there the ranks of men give way: so Hector, going through the crowd,
rolled along, inciting his companions to cross the trench. Nor did the
swift-footed horses dare [it];[394] but they loudly neighed, standing
upon the precipitous brink; for the wide ditch affrighted [them], nor
was it easy to leap across, [by standing] near,[395] or to pass it, for
overhanging brinks stood round it on both sides, and beneath it was
fortified with sharp palisades, which the sons of the Greeks had fixed,
close-set and large, as a defence against hostile men. There a horse,
drawing a swift-rolling chariot, could not readily enter, but the
infantry eagerly desired it, if they could accomplish it. Then indeed
Polydamas, standing near, addressed daring Hector:

   [Footnote 392: Heyne compares Il. xiii. 812; Pseud.--Eur. Rhes.
   37; Find. Pyth. iv. 390; Tryphiod. 596. The Scholiast on both
   passages, Hesychius, t. i. p. 1006, and the Schol. on Oppian.
   Hal. v. 282, suppose that the lightning is meant; but it is far
   better to understand, with Heyne, "terrore divinitus immisso."]

   [Footnote 393: See Heyne, and Alberti on Hesych. t. ii. p. 1083.]

   [Footnote 394: Cf. Statius, Theb. x. 517:--

       "----ut patulas saltu transmittere fossas
       Horror equis; hærent trepidi, atque immane paventes
       Abruptum mirantur agi."]

   [Footnote 395: Understand ἐκ τοῦ σχεδὸν, "adstando prope ad fossæ
   oram, ut saltu facilius transilias."--Heyne.]

"Hector, and ye other leaders of the Trojans, and allies, unwisely do we
drive our fleet steeds through the trench, which is very difficult to
pass; since sharp palisades stand in it, and near them is the wall of
the Greeks. Wherefore it is by no means possible for the cavalry to
descend, or to fight, for it is a narrow place, where I think they would
be wounded. For if indeed lofty-thundering Jove, designing evil,
destroys the Greeks, but wishes to assist the Trojans, certainly I would
wish this to take place even immediately, that the Greeks perish here
inglorious, away from Argos. If, however, they rally, and a repulse from
the ships take place, and we be entangled in the dug trench, I do not
suppose that then even a messenger will return back to the city from the
Greeks. But come, let us all be persuaded as I shall advise. Let the
servants keep our horses at the trench, and let us, all on foot, clad in
armour, follow Hector in a close body; but the Greeks will not withstand
us, if indeed the end of destruction hang over them."

Thus spake Polydamas; but the safe counsel pleased Hector; and
immediately he leaped with his armour from his chariot on the ground.
Nor did the other Trojans assemble on horseback, but dismounting, they
rushed on, when they beheld noble Hector. Then each commanded his own
charioteer to rein his steeds in good order there at the trench, and
they, separating, drawing themselves up, and being arranged in five
columns, followed along with their leaders. Some then went with Hector
and illustrious Polydamas, who were most numerous and brave, and who
were most resolutely desirous, having broken down the wall, to fight at
the hollow ships. And Cebriones followed as a third; for Hector left
another, inferior to Cebriones, with his chariot. Others Paris
commanded, and Alcathous, and Agenor. The third band Helenus and godlike
Deïphobus, two sons of Priam; but the third [commander] was the hero
Asius, Asius son of Hyrtacus, whom fiery, tall steeds brought from
Arisba, from the river Selleïs. But the fourth, Æneas, the brave son of
Anchises, led; along with him were the two sons of Antenor, Archilochus
and Acamas, well skilled in every kind of fight. But Sarpedon commanded
the illustrious allies, and chose to himself Glaucus and warlike
Asteropæus; for they appeared to him, next to himself decidedly the
bravest of the rest: for he, indeed, excelled among all. When they then
had fitted each other together[396] with interlaced ox-hide bucklers,
they advanced, full of courage, direct against the Greeks, nor expected
that they would sustain them, but that they would fall in flight into
their black ships.

Then the other Trojans and far-summoned allies obeyed the counsel of
blameless Polydamas; but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, leader of heroes, was
unwilling to relinquish his horses and attendant charioteer, but with
them advanced to the swift ships,--foolish! Nor was he destined to
return again, borne on his steeds and chariot from the ships to
wind-swept Ilium, having avoided evil destiny. For him unlucky fate
first encircled from the spear of Idomeneus, the illustrious son of
Deucalion. For he rushed towards the left of the ships, by the way in
which the Greeks were returning from the plain with their horses and
chariots. Thither he drove his horses and his chariot, nor did he find
the gates closed[397] in the portal, or the long bar up, but the men
held them wide open, that they might safely receive at the ships any of
their companions flying from the battle. He designedly guided his steeds
right onward in that way, and [his troops], shrilly shouting, followed
along with him; for they supposed that the Greeks could no longer
sustain them, but would fall in flight into the black ships--fools! for
at the gates they found two very brave heroes, the magnanimous sons of
the warlike Lapithæ, the one the son of Pirithous, gallant Polypœtes,
the other Leonteus, equal to man-slaughtering Mars. These two then stood
before the lofty gates, as tall oaks on the mountains, which abide the
wind and rain at all seasons, remaining firmly fixed by their great and
wide-spreading roots; so they too, trusting to their hands and strength,
awaited mighty Asius coming on, nor fled. But the troops, lifting high
their well-seasoned bucklers, advanced with loud shouting directly
towards the well-built wall, round their king Asius, and Iämenus, and
Orestes, Acamas, the son of Asius, Thoon, and Œnomäus. Hitherto indeed
these, remaining within, were exhorting the well-armed Greeks to fight
for the ships; but when they perceived the Trojans rushing against the
wall, and confusion and flight of the Greeks arose, both darting out,
fought before the gates, like unto wild boars, which await the
approaching tumult of men and dogs in the mountains, and, advancing
obliquely to the attack, break down the wood around them, cutting it to
the root; and a gnashing of teeth arises from beneath, till some one,
having taken aim, deprive them of life. So resounded the shining brass
upon their breasts, smitten in front, for very valiantly they fought,
trusting to the troops above, and to their own valour. But they hurled
stones down from the well-built towers, defending themselves, their
tents, and the swift-voyaging ships. And as snow-flakes fall upon the
earth, which the violent wind, having disturbed the shady clouds, pours
down thick upon the fertile soil; thus poured the weapons from the hands
as well of the Greeks as of the Trojans; and the helmets and bossy
shields, smitten with large stones, sounded drily around. Then indeed
Asius, son of Hyrtacus, groaned, and smote both his thighs, and
indignant exclaimed:

"Father Jove, surely now at least thou also hast become utterly
deceitful; for I did not expect that the Grecian heroes would abide our
strength and invincible hands. But they, as wasps flexible[398] in the
middle, and bees, [which] make their dwellings in a rugged path, nor
quit their hollow mansion; but awaiting the huntsmen, fight for their
offspring; so are these unwilling to retire from the gates, though being
only two, until they be either killed or taken."

   [Footnote 396: "Put for ἄραρον τὰς ἀσπίδας ἀλλήλων, ἐπ' ἀλλήλοις,
   _clipeos consertos_ manibus ante se tenebant, συνασπισμῷ
   facto."--Heyne. Kennedy well observes that "we may trace here the
   rude outline of the celebrated phalanx, which formed so prominent
   a feature of the Macedonian tactics."]

   [Footnote 397: From this passage, Heyne observes that the gates
   must have opened inwards, being secured from within by a double
   bolt (cf. ver. 455, sqq.). See D'Orville on Chariton, i. xii. p.
   274, ed. Lips. On the ὀχεῖς, on bars, cf. Pollux, x. 4.]

   [Footnote 398: Or "streaked." See Porphyr. Quæst. iii. But
   Buttmann, Lexil. p. 64, dwells much upon the force of μέσον,
   observing, "in no insect is _flexibility_ more evident than in
   the wasp, where the lower part of its body is joined as it were
   by a point with the upper."]

Thus he spake, nor did he persuade the mind of Jove, saying these
things: for his soul designed to bestow glory upon Hector. In the
meantime others were waging the battle at other gates; but difficult
would it be for me, as if I were a god, to enumerate all these things;
for around the wall in every direction a furiously-raging fire of stones
was aroused,[399] and the Greeks, although grieving, fought from
necessity for their ships; and all the gods were sorrowful in their
minds; as many as were allies to the Greeks in battle.

   [Footnote 399:

   "Through the long walls the stony showers were heard,
   The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appeared."--Pope.]

But the Lapithæ began the battle and contest. Then the son of Pirithous,
brave Polypœtes, smote Damasus with his spear, through his
brazen-cheeked helmet; nor did the brazen casque withstand, but the
brazen blade burst quite through the bone, and all the brain within was
shattered. Thus he subdued him, rushing on, and afterwards he slew Pylon
and Ormenus. And Leonteus, a branch of Mars, wounded Hippomachus, the
son of Antimachus, with his spear, striking him at the belt. Next,
drawing his sharp sword from the sheath, he, rushing through the crowd,
smote Antiphates first, hand to hand, and he was dashed on his back to
the ground; then Menon and Iämenus, and Orestes, all one over another he
brought to the fertile earth.

Whilst they were stripping off their glittering armour, those youths,
meantime, who were most numerous and most brave, and who were most eager
to break down the wall, and burn the ships with fire, followed Polydamas
and Hector, and they anxiously deliberated, standing at the trench. For
an augury had appeared on the left to them while eager to cross, a
high-flying eagle dividing the people,[400] bearing in his talons a
monstrous blood-stained serpent, alive, still panting; nor was it yet
forgetful of fighting; for, while holding it, writhing backwards, it
wounded him upon the breast near the neck; but he let it drop from him
to the ground, afflicted with anguish, and threw it into the midst of
the crowd, and, flapping his wings, he fled away with the breeze of the
wind. And the Trojans shuddered as they beheld the spotted serpent lying
in the midst, a prodigy of ægis-bearing Jove. Then Polydamas, standing
near, addressed gallant Hector:

"Hector, somehow or other thou art ever chiding me in the assemblies,
although proposing good counsels; because it is by no means becoming for
a man, being a citizen, to harangue contrary to thee, either in council
or at any time in war; but ever to increase thy authority. Yet will I
again speak as appears to me to be best. Let us not go about to fight
with the Greeks for their ships; for thus do I think it will end, as
sure as this augury has come to the Trojans desiring to cross, the
high-flying eagle upon the left dividing the army, bearing in its talons
a huge blood-stained serpent, [still] living; but presently it dropped
it, before it reached its dear home, nor succeeded in carrying it to
give it to its young: so we, if even we shall with great force break
through the gates and wall of the Greeks, and the Greeks shall give
way,--not in order shall we return by the same way from the ships: for
we shall leave many Trojans, whom the Greeks, fighting for the ships,
will subdue with the brass. Thus indeed would the diviner, who truly
kens omens in his mind, interpret, and the people would obey him."

   [Footnote 400: Either flying between the ranks of the Trojans, or
   between the two opposing armies. Compare Cicero's translation, de
   Divin. i. 47, and Virg. Æn. xi. 751, sqq. (with Macrob. Sat. v.
   13), and xii. 247, sqq. The event of the Trojan war proved that
   Polydamas was right in his interpretation.]

But him sternly regarding, crest-tossing Hector thus addressed: "O
Polydamas, thou dost not say things agreeable to me: besides, thou
knowest how to devise other counsel better than this. If, however, thou
really speakest this with seriousness, then truly have the gods
destroyed thy judgment from thee, who advisest me to be forgetful of the
counsels of lofty-thundering Jove, which he hath himself undertaken for
me, and confirmed. And thou exhortest me to obey the wing-expanding
birds; which I very little regard, nor do I care for them, whether they
fly to the right towards the Morn and the Sun, or to the left towards
the darkening west; but let us obey the will of mighty Jove, who rules
over all mortals and immortals. There is one augury, the best, to fight
for our country.[401] Why dost thou dread the war and conflict? For
although all the rest of us should perish round the ships of the Greeks,
there is no fear that thou wilt perish, for thy heart is not persevering
in the fight, nor warlike. But if thou darest to abstain from the
combat, or dissuading, dost avert another from the battle, immediately
stricken by my spear, shalt thou lose thy life."

Thus then having spoken, he led the way, but they followed him with an
immense clamour. Then thunder-delighting Jove raised a storm of wind
from the Idæan mountains, which bore the dust directly towards the
ships; moreover, he weakened the courage of the Greeks, but bestowed
glory upon the Trojans and Hector: so that, relying upon his prodigies,
and [their own] strength, they endeavoured to break through the mighty
wall of the Greeks. They tore down the niched battlements of the towers,
and demolished the breast-works,[402] and with levers they upheaved the
projecting buttresses, which the Greeks had planted first in the earth,
as supporters of the towers. These then they tore down, and hoped to
break through the wall of the Greeks.

Yet did not the Greeks retire as yet from the way; but fencing up the
embrazures with their ox-hide shields, they wounded from behind them the
enemy coming up under the wall. And both the Ajaces ranged in every
direction upon the towers, cheering on, rousing the valour of the
Greeks. One [they addressed][403] with soothing, another they rebuked
with harsh expressions, whomsoever they beheld totally neglectful of
battle:

   [Footnote 401: Cf. Aristot. Rhet. ii. 22; Cicero Ep. ad Attic,
   ii. 3. See, also, Duport, Gnom. Horn. p. 73.]

   [Footnote 402: Observe the zeugma, and compare Il. Ω. 8, Γ. 327;
   Od. Ξ. 291; and the most elaborate and accurate note on this
   construction of D'Orville on Charit. iv. 4, p. 440, sqq. ed.
   Lips., with Burm. and Schwabe on Phædr. iv. 17, 31; Duker on
   Flor. iii. 21, 26.]

   [Footnote 403: Id.]

"O friends, whoever of the Greeks is excelling, or moderate, or inferior
(since all men are not alike in war), now is there work for all; and ye
yourselves, I ween, know this. Let not any one be turned back towards
the ships, hearing the threatener [Hector], but advance onwards, and
exhort each other, if perchance Olympic Jove, the darter of lightning,
may grant that, having repulsed the conflict, we may pursue the enemy to
the city."

Thus they, shouting in front, cheered on the attack of the Greeks. But
of them--as when frequent flakes of snow fall upon a winter's day, when
provident Jove has begun to snow, displaying his weapons in the sight of
men, and, having lulled the winds, pours it down incessantly, till he
covers the tops and highest peaks of the lofty mountains, and the lotus
plains and rich husbandry of men: and likewise it is poured out upon the
havens and shores of the hoary sea; but the approaching wave restrains
its progress, whilst all other things are covered beneath it, when the
shower of Jove comes down heavily; so flew the frequent stones from
those hurling on both sides, some indeed towards the Trojans, and others
from the Trojans towards the Greeks. And along the whole wall a tumult
arose.

Yet never would the Trojans and illustrious Hector have burst open the
gates of the wall, and the long bolt, had not provident Jove urged on
his son, Sarpedon, against the Greeks, like a lion against
crooked-horned oxen. But he immediately held before him his shield,
equal on all sides, beautiful, brazen, plated; which the brazier indeed
had plated over, and underneath had sewed together thick bulls' hides,
with successive golden wires round its orb. He then, holding this before
him, advanced, brandishing two spears, like a lion reared in the
mountains, which hath been long in want of flesh, and whose valiant mind
impels him to go even to the well-fenced fold, about to make an attempt
upon the sheep. And although he there find the shepherds keeping watch
about their flocks with dogs and spears, still he cannot bear to be
driven away, without having made trial of the fold, but, springing in,
he either carries [one] off, or is himself wounded among the first by a
javelin from a quick hand. Thus then did his mind impel godlike Sarpedon
to attack the wall, and to burst through the barriers; and instantly he
addressed Glaucus, son of Hippolochus:

"Glaucus,[404] why are we especially honoured in Lycia, both with the
[first] seat in banquet, and with full goblets, and why do all look to
us as to gods? Why do we also possess a great and beautiful enclosure of
the vine-bearing and corn-bearing land on the banks of Xanthus? Now,
therefore, it behoves us, advancing among the foremost Lycians, to stand
firm, and to bear the brunt of the raging fight; so that some one of the
closely-armed Lycians may say, 'By no means inglorious do our kings
govern Lycia, and eat the fat sheep, and [drink][405] the choice sweet
wine; but their valour likewise is excelling, because they fight among
the foremost Lycians.' O dear friend, if indeed, by escaping from this
war, we were destined to be ever free from old age, and immortal,
neither would I combat myself in the van, nor send thee into the
glorious battle. But now--for of a truth ten thousand Fates of death
press upon us, which it is not possible for a mortal to escape or
avoid--let us on: either we shall give glory to some one, or some one to
us."

Thus he spake, nor did Glaucus turn aside or disobey, but both advanced
straight forward, leading a numerous band of Lycians. But Menestheus,
the son of Peteus, beholding them, shuddered, for they were advancing
towards his company, bearing destruction. He looked round along the line
of the Greeks, if he might see any of the leaders who could ward off the
fight from his companions, and perceived the two Ajaces, insatiable of
war, standing, and Teucer, lately come from his tent, near at hand. Yet
was it not possible for him to be heard when shouting, so great was the
din; and the crash of stricken shields, and of horse-hair crested
helmets, and of the gates, reached to heaven. For they had assailed
all,[406] and they, standing beside them, endeavoured to enter, bursting
them open by force. But immediately he despatched the herald Thoötes to
Ajax:

   [Footnote 404: Milton, P.L. ii. 450:--

                  "---- wherefore do I assume
       These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
       Refusing to accept as great a share
       Of hazard as of honour, due alike
       To him who reigns, and so much to him due
       Of hazard more, as he above the rest
       High honoured sits?"]

   [Footnote 405: Zeugma. See on ver. 268.]

   [Footnote 406: Three interpretations are given for this line:--1.
   "All the gates were attacked." 2. "All the gates were
   bolted."--Butt. 3. Change the nominative case to the accusative,
   and translate--"They (the Lycians) had attacked all the
   gates."--Ed. Dubl.]

"Go, noble Thoötes, running, call Ajax, rather indeed both: for this
would be by far the best of all, since in a short while heavy
destruction will arise here. For so vigorously do the leaders of the
Lycians press on, who even before were impetuous in the sharp contest.
If, however, labour and contest have arisen to them there, at least let
brave Telamonian Ajax come, and with him let Teucer follow, well skilled
in archery."

Thus he spoke, nor did the herald, having heard him, disobey, but he
hastened to run along the wall of the brazen-mailed Greeks, and
proceeding, he stood beside the Ajaces and immediately addressed them:

"Ye Ajaces, leaders of the brazen-mailed Greeks, the beloved son of
Jove-nourished Peteus adjures you to come thither, that ye may
participate in his toil, though for a short time. Both indeed in
preference, for this would be by far the best of all things, since soon
will heavy destruction arise there. For so vigorously do the leaders of
the Lycians press on, who even before were impetuous in the sharp
contest. But if here also war and contest have arisen, at least let
brave Telamonian Ajax come alone, and with him let Teucer follow, well
skilled in archery."

Thus he spake, nor did mighty Telamonian Ajax disobey. Instantly he
addressed to the son of Oïleus winged words:

"Ajax, do thou and gallant Lycomedes, standing here, incite the Greeks
to fight bravely, whilst I go thither and oppose the battle; but I will
return again instantly, after I shall have assisted them."

Thus then having spoken, Telamonian Ajax departed, and with him went
Teucer, his brother, sprung from the same father; and Pandion, along
with them, carried the bent bow of Teucer. As soon as they reached the
tower of magnanimous Menestheus, going within the wall (for they came to
[their friends] being hard pressed: and the brave leaders and chiefs of
the Lycians were mounting upon the breast-works like unto a dark
whirlwind), but they engaged to fight in opposition, and a clamour
arose. Telamonian Ajax first slew a man, the companion of Sarpedon,
magnanimous Epicles, striking him with a rugged stone, which, mighty in
size, lay highest up against a pinnacle within the wall. Not easily
would a man support it with both hands, such as mortals now are, not
although being very youthful; but he, raising it aloft, hurled it, and
burst the four-coned helmet, and along with it crushed all the bones of
the skull: but he, like unto a diver, fell from the lofty tower, and
life deserted his bones. Teucer likewise with a shaft wounded Glaucus,
the brave son of Hippolochus, as he was rushing on, against the lofty
wall, in a part where he perceived his arm naked; and made him cease
from combat. But he sprang back from the wall, concealing himself, that
none of the Greeks might perceive him wounded, and insult him with
words. Then grief came upon Sarpedon on account of Glaucus departing,
as soon as he observed it; though he nevertheless was not neglectful of
the contest: but he taking aim, wounded Alcmaon, son of Thestor, with
his spear, and extracted the spear; but he. following the weapon, fell
prone, and his armour, variously decked with brass, resounded upon him.
Sarpedon then seizing the buttress with his sturdy hands, pulled, and it
all followed entirely; but the wall was stripped away from above, and he
formed a way for many. Then Ajax and Teucer aiming at him together, the
one smote him with an arrow in the splendid belt of his mortal-girding
shield, around his breast; but Jove averted the fate from his son, that
he might not be slain at the sterns of the ships. But Ajax, springing
upon him, struck his shield, and pierced him quite through with his
spear, and forcibly checked him eager. And then he fell back for a
little from the buttress, but did not altogether retreat, because his
spirit hoped to bear off glory. And turning round, he encouraged the
godlike Lycians:

"O Lycians, why are ye thus remiss in your impetuous force? It is
difficult for me, although being brave, having alone burst through, to
form a way to the ships. But follow along with me; for the labour of the
greater number is better."

Thus he spake; and they, reverencing the exhortation of their king,
pressed on with more alacrity round their counsel-giving king. And the
Greeks, on the other side, strengthened their phalanxes within the wall,
because a great work presented itself to them. For neither could the
gallant Lycians, bursting through the wall of the Greeks, make their way
to the ships, nor could the warlike Greeks repulse the Lycians from the
wall, since first they approached it. But as two men, holding measures
in their hands, dispute, in a common field,[407] concerning their
boundaries, who in a small space contend for their equitable right; thus
did the buttresses separate these [warriors], and, for them, each smote
the well-rounded ox-hide shields around each other's breasts, and the
light bucklers of each other. And many were wounded upon the body with
the merciless brass, whether the back of any combatant, averted, was
laid bare, and many right through the shield itself. Everywhere the
towers and buttresses were sprinkled, on both sides, with the blood of
heroes, from the Trojans and the Greeks. Yet not even thus could they
cause a flight of the Greeks, but they held themselves, as a just woman,
who labours with her hands, does the scales,[408] who, poising both the
weight and the wool, draws them on either side to equalize them, that
she may procure a scanty pittance for the support of her children. Thus
equally was their battle and war extended, before the time when Jove
gave superior glory to Hector, the son of Priam, who first leaped within
the wall of the Greeks, and shouted with a penetrating voice, calling
out to the Trojans:

"Push on, ye horse-breaking Trojans, burst through the wall of the
Greeks, and hurl the fiercely-blazing fire against the ships."

Thus he spake, cheering them on; but they all heard him with their ears,
and rushed against the wall in great numbers, and then mounted the
battlements, carrying their pointed spears. But Hector seizing it, took
up a stone, which stood before the gates, widening out at the base,[409]
but sharp above; which two men, the strongest of the people, such as
mortals now are, could not easily raise from the ground upon a waggon.
He, however, brandished it easily and alone, because the son of wise
Saturn had rendered it light to him.

   [Footnote 407: _I.e._ a field, to part of which each lays claim.
   Μέτρα seem to be the lines used in measuring ground ("linea
   mensuralis," Siculus Flaccus, p. 23, ed. Goes.)·]

   [Footnote 408: Milton, P.L. vi. 245:--

                 ----"long time in even scale
         The battle hung."]

   [Footnote 409: See Eustathius.]

As when a shepherd without difficulty carries the fleece of a male
sheep, taking it in either hand, and but a small weight oppresses him;
so Hector, raising the stone, bore it right against the beams which
strengthened the closely-jointed gates, double and lofty; but two
cross-bars secured them within, and one key fitted them. But advancing,
he stood very near, and exerting his strength, struck them in the
middle, standing with his legs wide asunder, that the blow of the weapon
might not be weak. And he tore away both hinges, and the stone fell
within with a great weight; and the gates crashed around; nor did the
bars withstand it, but the beams were rent asunder in different
directions by the impulse of the stone. There illustrious Hector rushed
in, in aspect like unto the dreadful night; and he glittered in
terrible brass, with which he was girt around his body. And he held two
spears in his hands, nor could any one, opposing, restrain him, except
the gods, after he had leaped within the gates; but his eyes gleamed
with fire. And turning to the crowd, he cheered on the Trojans to ascend
the wall, and they obeyed him encouraging. Straightway indeed some
crossed the wall, and others were poured in through the well-wrought
gates, but the Greeks were routed towards the hollow barks, and an
unyielding[410] tumult ensued.

   [Footnote 410: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 405,]




                         BOOK THE THIRTEENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Neptune engages on the Grecian side, and the battle proceeds. Deïphobus
is repulsed by Meriones. Teucer kills Imbrius, and Hector Amphimachus.
Neptune, assuming the likeness of Thoas, exhorts Idomeneus, who goes
forth with Meriones to battle, when the former slays Othryoneus and
Asius. Deïphobus attacks Idomeneus, but misses him, and slays Hypsenor.
Idomeneus slays Alcathous, over whose body a sharp contest ensues.


But after Jove, then, had brought the Trojans and Hector near the ships,
he left them to endure labour and toil at them incessantly; but he
himself turned back his shining eyes apart, looking towards the land of
the equestrian Thracians and the close-fighting Mysians, and the
illustrious Hippomolgi, milk-nourished, simple in living, and most just
men.[411] But to Troy he no longer now turned his bright eyes; for he
did not suppose in his mind that any one of the immortals, going, would
aid either the Trojans or the Greeks.

   [Footnote 411: Arrian, Exp. Alex. iv. p. 239, referring to this
   passage of Homer, observes, οἰκοῦσι δὲ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ οὗτοι
   αὐτόνομοι, οὐχ ἥκιστα διὰ πενίαν τε καὶ δικαιότητα. Dionysius,
   Perieg. 309, seems, as Hill observes, to consider the name
   ἱππημολγοί as applicable not to one single clan, but to the whole
   of the Sarmatian nomads, milk being one of the principal articles
   of their diet, as among the Suevi (Cæsar, B.G. iv. 1), and the
   ancient Germans (id. vi. 22). Callimachus, Hymn iii., applies the
   epithet to the Cimmerians. The epithet ἀβίων (or ἀβιῶν=_bowless_,
   not living by archery: cf. Alberti on Hesych. t. i. pp. 17, 794)
   is involved in doubt, and the ancients themselves were uncertain
   whether to regard it as a proper name or an epithet. (Cf. Steph.
   Byz. s. v., p. 7, ed. Pined.; Villois on Apoll. Lex. p. 14;
   Duport, Gnom. Horn. p. 74, sqq.) It seems best to understand with
   Strabo, vii. p. 460, nations ἀπ' ὀλίγων εὐτελῶς ζὧντας. Knight
   wished to throw out these verses altogether, alleging that
   allusion is made in them to the discipline of Zamolxis, with
   which Homer must have been wholly unacquainted.]

Nor did king Neptune keep a vain watch; for he sat aloft upon the
highest summit of the woody Thracian Samos, admiring the war and the
battle. For from thence all Ida was visible, and the city of Priam was
visible, and the ships of the Greeks. Then coming out of the sea, he sat
down, and he pitied the Greeks, subdued by the Trojans, and was very
indignant with Jove. But presently he descended down, from the rugged
mountain, rapidly advancing on foot, and the high hills and woods
trembled beneath the immortal feet of Neptune, advancing. Thrice indeed
he strode, advancing, and with the fourth step he reached Ægæ, his
destined goal. There distinguished mansions, golden, glittering, ever
incorruptible, were erected to him in the depths of the sea. Coming
thither, he yoked beneath his chariot the brazen-footed steeds, swiftly
flying, crested with golden manes. But he himself placed gold around his
person, took his golden lash, well wrought, and ascended his chariot. He
proceeded to drive over the billows, and the monsters of the deep[412]
sported beneath him on all sides from their recesses, nor were ignorant
of their king. For joy the sea separated; and they flew very rapidly,
nor was the brazen axle moist beneath. And his well-bounding steeds bore
him to the ships of the Greeks.

Now there is an ample cave[413] in the recesses of the deep sea, between
Tenedos and rugged Imbrus. There earth-shaking Neptune stopped his
horses, loosing them from the chariot, and cast beside [them] ambrosial
fodder to eat. And round their feet he threw golden fetters,
irrefragable, indissoluble, that they might there steadily await their
king returning, but he departed towards the army of the Greeks.

   [Footnote 412: So I have ventured to render κήτεα. Nonius
   Marcell. v. Cetarii--"cete in mari majora sunt piscium genera."
   Thus Quintus Calaber, v. 94, imitating this passage, has
   δελφινες, and Hesychius defines κητών by θύννων φορά, the word
   evidently meaning any huge fish. Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 378, sq.]

   [Footnote 413: Compare the description of the cave of Nereus, in
   Apoll. Rhod. iv. 771, sqq., and of the river Peneus, in Virg.
   Georg. iv. 359, sqq., with my note on Æsch. Prom. p. 11, ed.
   Bohn.]

The Trojans, however, in crowds, like unto a flame or a whirlwind,
followed Hector, the son of Priam, with insatiable ardour, shouting
loudly, and exclaiming; for they hoped to capture the ships of the
Greeks, and slay all the Greeks beside them. But earth-ruling,
earth-shaking Neptune, coming from the deep sea, aroused the Greeks,
assimilating his person and indefatigable voice to Calchas. The Ajaces
he first addressed, though themselves were earnest:

"Ye Ajaces, ye indeed, mindful of valour, not of direful flight, will
preserve the people of the Greeks. For in any other place, indeed, I do
not dread the audacious hands of the Trojans, who in great numbers have
surmounted the great wall, because the well-greaved Greeks will sustain
them all. But in that place I grievously fear lest we suffer any thing,
where infuriated Hector, like unto a flame, leads on who boasts to be
the son of almighty Jove. But may some of the gods thus put it in your
minds, that ye stand firmly yourselves, and exhort others; thus may ye
drive him, although impetuous, from the swift-sailing ships, even if
Jove himself excites him."

He said, and earth-ruling Neptune, striking both with his sceptre,
filled them with violent might, and made their limbs light and their
feet and hands above. But he, like as a swift-winged hawk is impelled to
fly, which, lifted up from a rugged, lofty rock, has hastened to pursue
another bird over the plain; so darted earth-shaking Neptune from them.
But fleet Ajax, the son of Oïleus, recognized him first of the two, and
straightway addressed Ajax, the son of Telamon:

"O Ajax, since some one of the gods, who possess Olympus, likening
himself to the soothsayer, exhorts us to fight beside the ships (neither
is this Calchas, the prophesying augur; for I readily recognized the
traces of his feet and legs when departing; for the gods are easily
distinguished), even to myself, the soul within my bosom is more incited
to war and to fight, and my feet beneath and hands above eagerly desire
it."

But him Telamonian Ajax answering, addressed: "So also to me are my
strong hands upon my spear eager, and my courage is aroused, and I am
hurried along by both my feet under me; and I eagerly long, even alone,
to combat with Hector, the son of Priam, insatiably raging."

Thus they addressed these words to each other, joyful in the desire of
battle[414] which the god had infused into their minds. In the meanwhile
the Earth-ruler (Neptune) aroused the Achæans in the rear, who were
recruiting their spirit at the swift ships; whose limbs were at the same
time relaxed with toilsome labour, and grief was arising in their minds,
beholding the Trojans, who with a tumult had surmounted the vast wall.
But beholding them, they poured forth tears from beneath their eyebrows,
for they expected not to escape destruction: but the Earth-shaker
intervening, easily aroused the brave phalanxes. To Teucer and Leius he
first came, exhorting them, and to the hero Peneleus, and Thoas, and
Deipyrus, and to Meriones and Antilochus, skilful in war. These he
encouraging, spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 414: See Heyne, who compares the Latin _gestire_.
   Hesych.: Χάρμη, η ρετά χαράς μάχη.]

"O shame! Argives, young men, I trust that our ships will be preserved
by your fighting; but if ye be remiss in the destructive battle, the day
is now come [for us] to be subdued by the Trojans. Ye gods, surely I
behold with my eyes a great marvel, terrible, which I never expected
would be brought to pass, that the Trojans should approach our ships;
who formerly, like unto timid stags, which through the wood are the prey
of lynxes, pards, and wolves, foolishly straying about, weak, nor fit
for combat: so the Trojans formerly would not stand even for a little
against the might and prowess of the Greeks. But now, far away from the
city, they combat at the hollow ships, through the perverseness of our
general, and the indifference of the troops; who, disputing with him,
are unwilling to defend the swift ships, but are slain among them. Yet
although in reality the hero, the son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon,
be altogether in fault, in that he hath dishonoured the swift-footed son
of Peleus, still it is by no means our duty to be remiss in battle, but
let us the sooner repair [the mischief];[415] the minds of the brave are
easily appeased. But they by no means honourably remit your impetuous
valour, being all the bravest in the army: I indeed would not quarrel
with a man who should desist from combat, being unwarlike; but with you
I am indignant from my heart. O soft ones! surely will ye soon create
some greater evil by this inertness: but do each of you in his mind
ponder on the shame and reproach; for certainly a mighty contest hath
arisen. Now indeed brave Hector, good in the din of war, combats at the
ships, and hath burst through the gates and the long bar."

   [Footnote 415: Τὸ γεγονὸς ἀμάρτημα: Schol. For the metaphorical
   use of άκεσταί, cf. Soph. Ant. 1026. Ὅστις ἐς κακὸν Πεσὼν ἀκεῖται
   μηδ' ἀκίνητος πέλει So εὐιατότερος διὰ τὸ μεταπεισθῆναι ἄν,
   Aristot. Eth. vii. 2.]

Thus then Neptune, exhorting, aroused the Greeks. But round the two
Ajaces firm phalanxes stood, which not even Mars, coming amongst them,
would have found fault with, nor Minerva, the confounder of armies; for
the bravest selected awaited the Trojans and noble Hector; knitting
spear with spear, shield with shield,[416] one upon another,[417] so
that shield pressed upon shield, helmet upon helmet, and man upon man.
And the horse-haired helmets of them, nodding, touched each other with
their splendid ridges,[418] so closely stood they to one another; and
spears in the act of being hurled, were brandishing from their daring
hands, whilst they wished [to go] straight [against the enemy], and were
eager to fight. But the combined Trojans first made the attack, and
impetuous Hector first rushed against them: as a destructively-rolling
stone from a rock, which a wintry torrent drives down the brow, having
burst with a mighty shower the stays of the rugged rock, and bounding
along, it rolls, and the forest resounds beneath it: but straightway it
runs on uninterruptedly until it reach the plain, but then it rolls no
longer, though impelled; so Hector for a while threatened that he would
easily come as far as the sea, to the tents and ships of the Greeks,
slaughtering. But when now he met the firm phalanxes, he stopped, being
come into close contact; and the sons of the Greeks, opposing, repulsed
him from them, striking him with their swords and two-edged spears; but
retiring, he was compelled to withdraw; and he cried out shouting
audibly to the Trojans:

"Ye Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, stand firm. Not
long will the Greeks withstand me, although they have drawn themselves
up in very dense array.[419] But, I conceive, they will retire from my
spear, if in truth the most powerful of the gods, the high-thundering
husband of Juno, hath urged me on."

   [Footnote 416: See the learned remarks of Duport, p. 76, sq. To
   quote parallel passages would be endless.]

   [Footnote 417: Literally, "from the roots." So
   οίχεται--προθελυμνα, Tryphiodor. 388. Cf. Alberti on Hesych. t.
   ii. p. 1029; Apoll. Lex. p. 676.]

   [Footnote 418: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 523. The φάλος formed a
   socket for the plume.]

   [Footnote 419: Lit. "tower-wise," forming a solid square.]

So saying, he aroused the might and courage of each. But Deïphobus, the
son of Priam, walked amongst them, high-minded, and he held his shield
equal on all sides before him, proceeding with light step, and advancing
under protection of his shield. Then Meriones took aim with his shining
spear, and struck him (nor did he miss) upon the bull's-hide shield,
equal on all sides, which he did not pierce; for the long spear, far
before was broken at the socket. But Deïphobus held his bull's-hide
shield far from him, for he dreaded in his mind the spear of warlike
Meriones; but that hero fell back into the column of his companions, for
he was grievously enraged on both accounts, both for [the loss] of the
victory, and of the spear which he had broken. Accordingly he proceeded
to pass by the tents and ships of the Greeks, to bring a long spear
which had been left in his tent; whilst the others fought, and a mighty
tumult arose.

Then Telamonian Teucer first slew a hero, the warrior Imbrius, son of
Mentor, rich in steeds; and he dwelt at Pedæum before the sons of the
Greeks arrived, and had married Medesicaste, the illegitimate daughter
of Priam. But when the equally-plied ships of the Greeks arrived, he
came back to Ilium, and excelled among the Trojans; and dwelt with
Priam, who honoured him equally with his sons. Him the son of Telamon
smote under the ear with his long javelin, and plucked out the spear;
but he indeed fell, like an ash, which, on the summit of a mountain
conspicuous from afar, cut down with a brazen axe, strews its tender
foliage on the earth. Thus he fell, and his armour, variegated with
brass, rang about him. Then Teucer rushed on, eager to strip him of his
armour; but Hector hurled his shining spear at him, hastening. He,
however, seeing it from the opposite side, avoided, by a small space,
the brazen spear; and [Hector] wounded with his javelin, on the breast,
Amphimachus, son of Cteas, the son of Actor, advancing to the battle;
and, falling, he gave a crash, and his arms rang upon him. Then Hector
rushed to tear from the head of magnanimous Amphimachus the helmet
fitted to his temples, but Ajax hurled with his shining spear at Hector,
rushing on. Yet it never reached his body, for he was protected all over
with terrible brass; but he smote him upon the boss of the shield, and
repulsed him with great violence; and he retired from both bodies, and
the Greeks drew them away. Then Stichius and noble Menestheus, the
leaders of the Athenians, carried Amphimachus to the army of the Greeks,
but the two Ajaces, eager for impetuous combat, [carried] Imbrius. As
two lions bear a goat through the thick copse-wood, snatching it from
the sharp-toothed dogs, holding it high above the earth in their jaws;
so the two warriors, the Ajaces, holding him [Imbrius] aloft, stripped
off his armour; but the son of Oïleus, enraged on account of
Amphimachus, severed his head from his tender neck, and sent it rolling
like a ball through the crowd; but it fell before the feet of Hector in
the dust.

Then indeed was Neptune grieved at heart for his grandson, slain in the
grievous fight; and he proceeded to go along the tents and ships of the
Greeks, exhorting the Greeks, and prepared disasters for the Trojans.
But spear-renowned Idomeneus then met him, returning from a companion
who had lately come to him from the battle, wounded in the ham with the
sharp brass, whom his comrades had carried in, and he, having given
directions to the surgeons, was returning from his tent; for he still
desired to participate in the fight. Him king Neptune addressed,
assimilating himself, as to his voice, to Thoas, son of Andræmon, who
governed the Ætolians throughout all Pleuron and lofty Calydon, and who
was honoured by the people as a god:

"Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans, where indeed are the threats
gone, with which the sons of the Greeks threatened the Trojans?" Whom
again in return, Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, addressed: "No
man, O Thoas, as far as I know, is at present to blame; for we are all
skilled in warring. Neither does disheartening fear detain any one, nor
does any one, yielding to sloth, shirk evil strife; but thus, doubtless,
it will be agreeable to the all-powerful son of Saturn, that here, far
away from Argos, the Greeks shall perish inglorious. But, Thoas--for
formerly thou wast warlike, and urged on others when thou didst behold
them negligent--so now desist not thyself, but exhort each man."

But him earth-shaking Neptune then answered: "Never may that man, O
Idomeneus, return from Troy, but let him here be the sport of the dogs,
whosoever voluntarily this day shall relax from fighting. But come,
taking up arms, advance hither; for it behoves us to hasten these
things, if we may be of any service, although but two; for useful is the
valour of men, even the very pusillanimous, if combined, whereas we both
understand how to fight even with the brave."

So saying, the god departed again to the toil of heroes. But Idomeneus,
when now he had reached his well-made tent, put on his rich armour
around his body, and seized two spears, and hastened to go, like unto
the lightning, which the son of Saturn, seizing in his hand, brandishes
from glittering Olympus, showing a sign to mortals; and brilliant are
its rays: so shone the brass around the breast of him running. Then
Meriones, his good attendant, met him yet near the tent,--for he was
going to fetch a brazen spear; and the strength of Idomeneus addressed
him:

"Meriones, son of Molus, swift of foot, dearest of my companions, why
comest thou thus, quitting the war and the contest? Art thou at all
wounded, and does the point of a spear afflict thee? Or comest thou to
me on any message? For I myself am not desirous to sit within my tent,
but to fight."

But him prudent Meriones in turn answered: "Idomeneus, thou counsellor
of the brazen-mailed Cretans, I come, if there be any spear left within
thy tents, to take it: because I indeed have broken that which I
formerly had, having struck the shield of ferocious Deïphobus." Whom
again in turn Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, addressed: "Thou wilt
find, if thou desirest [to select from them], one-and-twenty spears
standing in my tent against the shining walls, which I have taken from
the slain Trojans; for I affirm that I do not fight with hostile men,
standing at a distance from them. Hence I have both spears, and bossy
shields, and helmets, and corslets, brightly polished."

But him again prudent Meriones addressed in turn: "At my tent also and
black ship are there many spoils of the Trojans; but they are not near,
so that I might take them. For neither do I conceive that I am forgetful
of valour, but I stand among the foremost in glory-giving battle,
whenever the contest of war has arisen. I am rather unobserved perhaps,
when fighting by some other of the brazen-mailed Greeks; but I think
that thou knowest me."

Whom again Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, addressed in turn: "I know
what thou art as to valour: what necessity is there for thee to
enumerate these things? For if now all we the bravest at the ships
should be selected for an ambuscade, where the courage of men is
especially distinguished, where both the coward as well as the brave man
is made apparent--for the complexion of the coward on the one hand is
changed from this to that, nor is his heart calm within his bosom, so
that he can rest without trembling, but he shifts his position, and sits
upon both his feet, whilst his heart greatly palpitates within his
breast, as he is expecting death; and a chattering of his teeth arises.
But neither is the complexion of the brave man changed, nor is he at all
disturbed, after he first sits down in the ambush of heroes; but he
burns to be mingled with all haste in direful fight--[no one], in that
case, would find fault with thy courage and might. For if, labouring [in
the battle], thou wert wounded from a distance, or smitten in close
fight, the weapon would not fall upon thy neck behind, nor upon thy
back; but it would pierce through either thy breast, or thy stomach, as
thou wast rushing forward amid the conflict[420] of foremost combatants.
But come, no longer let us speak of these things, standing like
infatuated persons, lest perhaps some one chide us inordinately; but do
thou, going to the tent, take a strong spear."

   [Footnote 420: Hesych. Όαριστυν μάχην. Etym. Μ. fol. 131, Β. 2.
   'Αντί του εv τη των τρωταγωνιστων oμιλίᾳ (which is its proper
   meaning, as derived from oaρ) και συναναστρoφη.]

Thus be spake, and Meriones, equal to swift Mars, quickly took from the
tent a brazen spear; and he went along with Idomeneus, very eager for
war. But as man-destroying Mars enters the battle--with whom Terror, his
dear son, at the same time powerful and undismayed, follows, who strikes
fear into the warrior even of resolute soul: these indeed are armed from
Thrace, along with the Ephyri or with the magnanimous Phlegyans; neither
do they hear both, but they give glory to one or the other--so Meriones
and Idomeneus, leaders of heroes, advanced to battle equipped with
helmets of glittering brass; and Meriones first addressed him in these
words:

"Son of Deucalion, where dost thou meditate to enter the throng? To the
right of all the army, or at the centre, or upon the left? Since nowhere
[else][421] in the battle do I conceive that the long-haired Greeks so
much require support."

   [Footnote 421: _I.e._ nowhere so much as on the left.]

But him Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, in turn addressed: "Among
the centre ships indeed there are others to aid them, both the Ajaces
and Teucer, who is the most skilful of the Greeks in archery, and brave
also in standing fight; who will sufficiently harass, even to satiety,
Hector, the son of Priam, although most urgent of battle, and although
being very gallant. Hard will it be for him, although very desirous of
fighting, having overpowered their strength and invincible hands, to
fire the ships, unless the son of Saturn himself cast a flaming torch
upon the swift ships. Nor indeed will mighty Telamonian Ajax yield to
any man who may be a mortal, and who may eat the fruit of Ceres, who is
vulnerable by brass and by large stones. Not even to warlike Achilles
would he give way, at least in standing fight; but in speed he is by no
means able to contend with him. Guide us, therefore, to the left of the
army that we may quickly know whether we shall afford glory to any one,
or any one to us."

Thus he spoke. But Meriones, equal to rapid Mars, began to proceed,
until he came to [that part of] the army whither he had ordered him. But
they, when they beheld Idomeneus, like unto a flame in might, both him
and his attendant, in variously-wrought armour, they all, exhorting one
another along the crowd, advanced against him, and an equal contest
arose at the sterns of their ships. And as when storms sweep along,
[driven] by the shrill winds, on a day when the dust around the roads
[is] very abundant, and they at the same time raise up a large cloud of
dust; so came on the battle of these together, and they were eager in
their minds to slaughter one another throughout the throng with the
sharp brass. And the mortal-destroying combat bristles with the long
spears which they held, flesh-rending; and the brazen splendour from the
gleaming helmets, the newly-burnished corslets, and the shining shields,
coming together, dazzled their eyes. Very brave-hearted would he be who,
when beholding their toil, could have rejoiced, and would not be
disturbed.

But the two powerful sons of Saturn, favouring different sides, planned
grievous toils for the heroes. On the one hand, Jove willed victory to
the Trojans and to Hector, glorifying swift-footed Achilles; yet he
desired not entirely to destroy the Grecian people before Ilium, but was
honouring Thetis and her magnanimous son. On the other hand, Neptune,
coming amongst them, encouraged the Greeks, having secretly emerged from
the hoary deep; for he grieved that they should be subdued by the
Trojans, and he was greatly indignant with Jove. The same race indeed
was to both, and the same lineage, but Jove was born first,[422] and
knew more. For this reason [Neptune] avoided aiding them openly, but
always kept privately inciting them through the army, assimilated to a
man. They indeed alternately stretched over both the cord of vehement
contest and equally destructive war, irrefragable and indissoluble,
which relaxed the knees of many. Then, although half-hoary Idomeneus,
encouraging the Greeks, rushing upon the Trojans, created night; for he
slew Othryoneus, who had come from Cabesus, staying within [Priam's
house].[423] He had lately come after the rumour of the war, and
demanded Cassandra, the most beautiful in form of the daughters of
Priam, without a dowry; and he had promised a mighty deed, to repulse in
spite of themselves the sons of the Greeks from Troy. But to him aged
Priam had promised her, and pledged himself[424] to give her; therefore
he fought, trusting in these promises. But Idomeneus took aim at him
with his shining spear, and hurling it, struck him, strutting proudly;
nor did the brazen corslet which he wore resist it, but he fixed it in
the middle of his stomach. And falling, he gave a crash, and [the
other] boasted and said:

"Othryoneus! above all men indeed do I praise thee, if thou wilt now in
truth accomplish all which thou hast undertaken for Dardanian Priam: but
he also promised thee his daughter. We likewise, promising these things,
will accomplish them to thee. We will give thee the most beautiful in
form of the daughters of the son of Atreus to wed, bringing her from
Argos, if along with us thou wilt destroy the well-inhabited city of
Ilium. But follow, that we may treat with thee respecting the marriage
of the sea-traversing ships; since we are by no means bad
brothers-in-law."

   [Footnote 422: Heyne compares xiv. 204. The Erinnys were supposed
   to avenge any disrespect offered to an elder brother by a
   younger.]

   [Footnote 423: Literally, "being within from Cabesus."]

   [Footnote 424: Lit. "bowed assent."]

So saying, the hero Idomeneus dragged him by the foot through the brisk
battle. But to him Asius came as an avenger, on foot, before his steeds;
which his attendant charioteer always kept breathing over his
shoulders;[425] and in his mind he longed to strike Idomeneus, but he
(Idomeneus) anticipating him, smote him with his spear in the throat,
below the chin, and drove the brass quite through. And he fell, as when
some oak falls, or white poplar,[426] or towering[427] pine, which
timber-workers have cut down upon the mountains with lately-whetted
axes, to become ship timber. So he lay, stretched out before his horses
and chariot, gnashing his teeth, grasping the bloody dust. But the
charioteer was deprived of the senses which he previously had, nor dared
he turn back the horses that he might escape from the hands of the
enemy: but him warlike Antilochus, striking, transfixed in the middle
with his spear; nor did the brazen corslet which he wore resist, but he
fixed it in the centre of his stomach. Then, panting, he fell from the
well-made chariot-seat, and Antilochus, the son of magnanimous Nestor,
drove away the horses from the Trojans to the well-armed Greeks. But
Deïphobus, enraged on account of Asius, drew very near to Idomeneus, and
hurled with his shining spear. Idomeneus, however, having perceived it
opposite, avoided the brazen spear, for he was concealed behind his
shield equal on all sides, which he bore, constructed of the hides of
bulls, and glittering brass, fitted with two handles. Behind this he
collected himself entirely, and the brazen spear flew over him. But the
shield returned a dry[428] sound, the spear grazing it obliquely. Yet he
(Deïphobus) sent it not in vain from his heavy hand, but he struck
Hypsenor, son of Hippasus. the shepherd of the people, upon the liver,
below the breast, and straightway relaxed his knees under him. But
Deïphobus vainly boasted over him, loudly exclaiming:

   [Footnote 425: _I.e._ close by Asius (κατ' ώμων), he having
   descended for the purpose of rescuing the body of
   Othryoneus.--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 426: "Ἠ λευκη, populus alba."--Heyne.]

   [Footnote 427: Βλωθρός is connected with βλώσκω, as βληχρός with
   βλίττω. See Buttm. Lexil. p. 194. Hesych.: Βλωθρή' εύαυζής, ή
   προζαίνουσα καΐ άνω θρώσκουσα. Schol. on Apoll. Rhod. i. 322:
   Πίτυν βλωθρήν Όμηρος, την άχρι του αιθέρος μολίσκουσαν.]

   [Footnote 428: So v. 441: αυον άυσεν. So "aridus sonus," in
   Lucret. vi, 113; "aridus fragor," Virg. Georg. I. 357, noticed by
   Quintil. I.O. viii. 3. A dry, grating, half-crackling sound is
   meant.]

"Surely not unavenged lies Asius; I rather think that he will rejoice in
his mind, though going into the strong-gated, massy [dwelling] of Hades,
since I have given him a guide."

Thus he spoke; but grief came upon the Greeks at his boasting, and it
particularly agitated the mind of warlike Antilochus. Yet, grieved as he
was, he neglected not his companion, but running, he protected him, and
covered him over with his shield. Him then his two dear companions,
Mecisteus, son of Echius, and noble Alastor, supporting, bore to the
hollow ships, deeply groaning. In the meantime Idomeneus ceased not his
mighty valour; but always burned either to cover some of the Trojans
with pitchy night,[429] or himself to fall with a crash, repelling
destruction from the Greeks. Then the hero Alcathous, the beloved son of
Æsyetas (and he was the son-in-law of Anchises, for he had married
Hippodamia, the eldest of his daughters, whom her father and venerable
mother loved from their hearts, whilst in their home, because she
excelled all of her age in beauty, in accomplishments, and prudence,
for which reason also the most distinguished man in wide Troy had wedded
her), him Neptune subdued under Idomeneus, having dimmed his shining
eyes, and fettered his fair limbs. For he was able neither to fly back
nor to turn aside, but him, standing motionless, like a pillar or
lofty-branching tree, the hero Idomeneus wounded with his spear in the
middle of the breast, and burst the brazen coat around him, which
formerly warded off destruction from his body: but then it sent forth a
dry sound, severed by the spear. Falling, he gave a crash, and the spear
was fixed in his heart, which, palpitating, shook even the extremity of
the spear; and there at length the impetuous Mars[430] spent its force.
But Idomeneus boasted prodigiously over him, loudly exclaiming:

   [Footnote 429: _I.e._ death.]

   [Footnote 430: Here put for the weapon.]

"Deïphobus! do we judge rightly that it is a fair return, that three
should be slain for one, since thus thou boastest? But do thou thyself
also, wretch, stand against me, that thou mayest know of what nature I
am, who have come hither the offspring of Jove, who first begat Minos,
the guardian of Crete. Minos again begat Deucalion, his blameless son,
and Deucalion begat me, king over many men in wide Crete. But now the
ships have brought me hither, an evil both to thee and to thy father,
and the other Trojans."

Thus he spoke, but Deïphobus hesitated between two opinions, whether,
falling back, he should join to himself some one of the magnanimous
Trojans, or make trial although alone. But to him, thus deliberating, it
appeared preferable to go in search of Æneas; whom he found standing at
the rear of the army, for he was ever indignant with noble Priam,
because he by no means honoured him, though being valiant among heroes.
And, standing near, he addressed to him winged words:

"Æneas, thou counsellor of the Trojans, now does it greatly behove thee
to aid thy brother-in-law, if indeed any regard reaches thee. But
follow, let us bring aid to Alcathous, who, being thy brother-in-law,
nourished thee whilst very young, in his palace, and whom spear-famed
Idomeneus hath slain."

Thus he spoke, and roused the courage in his breast, and he, greatly
desirous of battle, went to meet Idomeneus. Yet fear seized not
Idomeneus like a tender boy, but he stood still, like a boar in the
mountains, confident in his prowess, and who abides the mighty din of
men advancing against him, in a desert place,[431] and bristles up his
back; his eyes, too, gleam with fire, and he whets his teeth, eager to
keep at bay both dogs and men. So spear-renowned Idomeneus awaited
Æneas, swift in the battle-din, coming against him, nor retired; but he
shouted to his companions, looking to Ascalaphus, and Aphareus, and
Deïpyrus, and Meriones, and Antilochus, skilful in fight. Exhorting
these, he addressed to them winged words:

   [Footnote 431: Or, "in the sheep-pasture."]

"Hither, my friends, and aid me alone, for I greatly dread swift-footed
Æneas, rushing on, who is coming upon me; who is very powerful to slay
men in battle, and possesses the bloom of youth, which is the greatest
strength. For if we were of the same age, with the spirit that I now
possess, quickly would either he bear off great glory, or I would."

Thus he spoke; but they all, having one determination in their minds,
stood near him, inclining their shields upon their shoulders. Æneas, on
the other hand, animated his companions, looking towards Deïphobus,
Paris, and noble Agenor, who, together with himself, were leaders of the
Trojans. These also the people followed, as sheep follow from their
pasture after the ram in order to drink; and the shepherd then is
rejoiced in his mind. So was the soul of Æneas gladdened in his breast,
when he beheld a body of troops following himself. These therefore
engaged in close fight round Alcathous with long spears, whilst the
brass resounded horribly on the breasts of them, aiming at each other
through the crowd. But two warlike men, conspicuous among the rest,
Æneas and Idomeneus, equal to Mars, longed to lacerate each other's
flesh with the ruthless brass. But Æneas first hurled his javelin at
Idomeneus; but he, perceiving it opposite, avoided the brazen spear; and
the spear of Æneas sank quivering into the earth; for it fled in vain
from his sturdy hand. Idomeneus next smote Œnomaus in the middle of the
stomach, and the spear burst the cavity of his corslet, and penetrating,
drank his entrails through; but falling amid the dust, he grasped the
earth with the hollow of his hand. Then Idomeneus plucked out the long
spear from his body, but was unable to tear off the other rich armour
from his shoulders, for he was pressed hard by weapons. For no longer
were the sinews of his feet firm as he rushed, either to hasten on after
his own dart,[432] or avoid [that of another]. Wherefore also in
standing fight, he warded off the fatal day, nor did his feet any longer
bear him with ease in retreating from the battle. But against him,
gradually retiring, Deïphobus took aim with his glittering spear, for he
ever had a rooted hatred towards him. But then too he missed, and struck
with his javelin Ascalaphus, the son of Mars, and drove the stout spear
through his shoulder; and tailing amid the dust, he grasped the earth
with his hand.

   [Footnote 432: So as to recover it.]

Not yet, however, had loudly-roaring,[433] impetuous Mars heard that his
son had fallen in the violent fight; but he sat upon the summit of
Olympus, beneath golden clouds, excluded [from the battle] by the will
of Jove, where also the other immortal gods were restrained from the
war. In the meantime they engaged in close fight round Ascalaphus.
Deïphobus indeed tore the shining helmet from Ascalaphus; and Meriones,
equal to swift Mars, springing [upon him], smote [him] with his spear in
the arm, and the crested[434] casque, falling from his hand, rang upon
the earth. Immediately Meriones, leaping upon him like a vulture,
plucked out the tough spear from the lower part of his arm, and retired
back again into the crowd of his comrades. But him Polites, his own
brother, throwing his hands round his waist, carried out of the
dread-sounding battle, till he reached his fleet steeds, which awaited
him in the rear of the combat and the war, having both a charioteer and
a variegated car; which then carried him towards the city, groaning
heavily [and] afflicted; and the blood flowed from his recently-wounded
hand: but the others kept fighting, and an unquenchable clamour arose.
Then Æneas rushing upon Aphareus, the son of Caletor, smote him with his
sharp spear upon the throat, when turned towards him. And his head was
bent to one side, then his shield clung to him, and his helmet; and
around him life-destroying death was spread. Antilochus, however,
observing Thoas turning around, attacking, wounded him; and cut away all
the vein, which, running quite along the back, reaches to the neck. All
this he cut off; but he fell on his back in the dust, stretching out
both hands to his beloved companions. Then Antilochus sprang upon him,
and stripped the armour from his shoulders, looking around; for the
Trojans surrounding him, struck his wide and ornamented shield with
their darts, nor were they able to graze with the dire brass the tender
body of Antilochus within it; because earth-shaking Neptune protected
the son of Nestor all round, even amongst many weapons. For never indeed
was he apart from the enemy, but he turned himself about among them: nor
did he hold his spear without motion, but continually moving, it was
whirled about; and he prepared within his mind, either to hurl it at
some one afar off, or to rush upon some one close at hand. But
meditating these things amid the throng, he escaped not the notice of
Adamas, the son of Asias, who smote him in the middle of his shield with
the sharp brass, attacking him in close combat; but azure-haired Neptune
weakened the spear, grudging[435] him the life [of Antilochus]. Part of
it remained there, like a stake burned in the fire,[436] in the shield
of Antilochus, and the other half lay upon the ground; whilst he gave
backwards into the crowd of his companions, shunning death. Meriones,
however, following him departing, smote him with his spear between the
private parts and the navel, where a wound[437] is particularly painful
to miserable mortals. There he fixed the spear in him; and he falling,
struggled panting around the spear, as an ox, when cowherds in the
mountains, forcibly binding him with twisted cords, lead [him] away
unwilling. So he, wounded, throbbed, though but for a short time, and
not very long, until the hero Meriones coming near, plucked the spear
from his body; and darkness veiled his eyes. But Helenas, close at hand,
struck Deïpyrus upon the temple with his huge Thracian sword, and cut
away the three-coned helmet; which, being dashed off, fell upon the
ground; and some one of the combating Greeks lifted it up, having rolled
between his feet; whilst dim night enveloped his eyes. Then grief seized
the son of Atreus, Menelaus, brave in the din of battle, and he
advanced, threatening the hero, king Helenus; brandishing his sharp
spear, whilst the other drew the horn of his bow. Together then they
darted, the one eager to launch his fir-tree spear, and the other an
arrow from the string. Then indeed the son of Priam smote him in the
breast with an arrow, on the cavity of the corslet, but the bitter shaft
rebounded. As when from the broad winnowing-fan in a large
threshing-floor, the black-coated beans or vetches leap at the shrill
blast, and the force of the winnower; so, strongly repulsed by the
corslet of glorious Menelaus, the bitter arrow flew afar. But Menelaus,
the son of Atreus, brave in the din of battle, smote him upon the hand
which held his well-polished bow; and in the bow the brazen spear was
fixed from the opposite side, through his hand. Then he retired back
into the crowd of his companions, avoiding death, hanging down his hand
at his side, but the ashen spear was trailed along with him. And then
magnanimous Agenor extracted it from his hand, and bound [the hand]
itself sling-ways in well-twisted sheep's wool, which his attendant
carried for the shepherd of the people.

   [Footnote 433: Βριήπυος=έρίγδουπος. The Schol. on Apoll. Rh. iii.
   860, observes: Βρί, έπιτάσεως έστίν, ὡς τὁ Βριήπυος.]

   [Footnote 434: The meaning of αὐλῶπις is rather uncertain.
   According to the Schol. and Hesychius, it means a helmet that has
   the openings for the eyes oblong (παραμήκεις ἔχουσα τὰς τῶν
   ὀφθαλμῶν ὀπάς), or a helmet with a long crest (έκτεταμένον
   λόφον).]

   [Footnote 435: Φθονήσας Άδάμαντι, μὴ τὁν βίον Άντιλόχου
   ἀφέληται.]

   [Footnote 436: The "præustæ sudes" of Cæsar, Β.G. ν. 40. These
   were among the rustic weapons of antiquity, as may be seen from
   Virg. Æn. vii. 523.

                          "Non jam certamine agresti
         Stipitibus duris agitur, sudibusve præustis;
         Sed ferro ancipiti decernunt."]

   [Footnote 437: Cf. vs. 444.]

But Pisander went direct against glorious Menelaus, because evil Fate
led him towards the end of death, to be subdued by thee, O Menelaus, in
the dire battle. When therefore they were near, advancing against each
other, the son of Atreus indeed missed, and his spear was turned aside
from him; but Pisander smote the shield of glorious Menelaus, nor could
he drive the spear quite through; because the broad shield kept it off,
and the spear was broken at the extremity: still he rejoiced in his
mind, and hoped for victory. The son of Atreus, however, drawing his
silver-studded sword, sprang upon Pisander; but he drew from beneath his
shield a handsome battle-axe of well-wrought brass, fixed upon either
side of an olive handle, long, well-polished; and at once they struck
each other. Then he (Pisander) cut away the cone of the helmet, thick
with horse-hair, under the very crest, but (Menelaus smote) him,
approaching, upon the forehead, above the root of the nose. And the
bones crashed, and his blood-stained eyes fell at his feet upon the
ground in the dust: and falling, he writhed. Then he (Menelaus) placing
his heel upon his breast, despoiled him of his armour, and boasting,
spoke [this] speech:

"Thus,[438] then, shall ye abandon the ships of the Greeks, who possess
swift steeds, ye treaty-breaking Trojans, insatiate of dire battle. Of
other injury and disgrace ye indeed lack nothing with which ye have
injured me, vile dogs, nor have ye at all dreaded in your minds the
heavy wrath of high-thundering, hospitable Jove, who will yet destroy
for you your lofty city; ye who unprovoked departed, carrying off my
virgin spouse, and much wealth, after ye had been hospitably received by
her. Now again do ye eagerly desire to hurl destructive fire upon the
sea-traversing ships, and to slay the Grecian heroes. But ye shall yet
be restrained, impetuous as ye be, from war. O father Jove, assuredly
they say that thou excellest all others, men and gods, in prudence, yet
from thee do all these things proceed. How much dost thou gratify these
insolent Trojan men, whose violence is ever pernicious, and who cannot
be satisfied with war, equally destructive to all! Of all things is
there satiety,--of sleep, of love, of sweet singing, and of faultless
dancing, with which one would much more readily satisfy his desire, than
with war; but the Trojans are insatiate of battle."

   [Footnote 438: _I.e._ by being slain one after another.]

So saying, having stripped the bloody armour from the body, illustrious
Menelaus gave it to his companions, whilst he, advancing, was again
mixed with the foremost combatants. Then Harpalion, the son of king
Pylæmenes, who had then followed his dear father to wage war at Troy,
leaped upon him; nor returned he back to his native land. [He it was]
who then, close at hand, struck the middle of Atrides' shield with his
lance, nor was he able to drive quite through the brass; but he retired
back into the crowd of his companions, avoiding death, looking around on
all sides, lest any one should touch his body[439] with a spear.
Meriones, however, shot a brazen-pointed arrow at him retreating, and
struck him upon the right hip, and the arrow penetrated to the other
side, through the bladder, below the bone. Sinking down, therefore, in
the same place, breathing out his life in the arms of his beloved
companions, like a worm, he lay stretched upon the ground, whilst his
black blood flowed, and moistened the earth. Around him the magnanimous
Paphlagonians were employed, and, lifting him upon a chariot, they bore
him to sacred Ilium, grieving; and with them went his father, shedding
tears: but no vengeance was taken for his dead son.

   [Footnote 439: As the usual construction of έπανρεΐν is with a
   genitive, Heyne would supply μή τις έπαύρη αύτού κατά χρόα.]

But Paris was greatly enraged in his soul on account of his being slain,
for he had been his guest among many Paphlagonians; wherefore, enraged
on his account, he sent forth a brazen arrow. Now there was one
Euchenor, son of the diviner Polyïdus, wealthy and brave, inhabiting a
dwelling at Corinth, who, well knowing his fatal destiny, had arrived in
a ship. For often had Polyïdus, good old man, told him, that he would
perish in his halls of a grievous disease, or be subdued by the Trojans
among the ships of the Greeks; wherefore he avoided at once the severe
mulct[440] of the Achæans, and odious disease, that he might not suffer
sorrows in his mind. Him he (Paris) smote below the jaw and the ear; and
his spirit quickly departed from his members, and hateful darkness
seized him.

Thus indeed they fought like[441] unto a burning fire. But Hector, dear
to Jove, had not learned, nor knew at all, how at the left of the ships
his people were being slaughtered by the Greeks, for the victory was on
the point of being the Grecians'; so much did earth-shaking Neptune
encourage the Greeks, and moreover himself assisted with his strength;
but he (Hector) pressed on where first he had sprung within the gates
and wall, breaking the thick ranks of the shielded Greeks. There were
the ships of Ajax and Protesilaus, drawn up upon the shore of the hoary
sea; but above[442] them the wall was built very low; there themselves
and their horses were most impetuous in the combat. There[443] the
Bœotians and long-robed Iaonians, the Locrians, the Phthians, and the
illustrious Epeans, restrained him from the ships, fiercely rushing on;
but were unable to drive away from them noble Hector, like unto a flame.
The chosen men of the Athenians stood in the van; among whom
Menestheus, son of Peteus, had the command; and with him followed
Phidas, Stichius, and brave Bias, Meges, the son of Phyieus, Amphion,
and Dracius, led the Epeans, and over the Phthians were Medon and
Podarces, steady in fight (Medon indeed was the spurious offspring of
godlike Oïleus, and the brother of Ajax; but he dwelt at Phylace, away
from his native country,[444] having slain a man, the brother of his
stepmother Eriopis, whom Oïleus had married. But the other was the son
of Iphiclus, of Phylace). These in arms before the magnanimous Phthians,
fought among the Bœotians, defending the ships.

   [Footnote 440: As Corinth was under the authority of Agamemnon,
   he would have been compelled to pay a fine for refusing the
   service. Compare the ἀτιμία της ἀστραείας at Athens. See
   Potter, Antiq. i. 23.]

   [Footnote 441: Cf. xi. 595, with the note.]

   [Footnote 442: _I.e._ before them.]

   [Footnote 443: _I.e._ where Hector broke in]

   [Footnote 444: See my note on ii. p. 42, n. 2.]

But Ajax, the swift son of Oïleus, never separated from Telamonian Ajax,
not even for a little time; but as in a fallow field two black bullocks
possessing equal spirit, draw a well-joined plough,--but meanwhile
copious sweat breaks forth around the roots of their horns; and them the
well-polished yoke alone separates on either side, advancing along the
furrows, and [the plough] cuts[445] up the bottom of the soil; so they
twain, joined together, stood very near to each other. And then many and
brave troops followed the son of Telamon as companions, who received
from him his shield, whenever fatigue and sweat came upon his limbs. But
the Locrians followed not the great-souled son of Oïleus, for their
heart remained not firm to them in the standing fight, because they had
not brazen helmets crested with horse-hair, nor had they well-orbed
shields and ashen spears; but they followed along with him to Ilium,
trusting in the bows and the well-twisted sheep's wool, with which,
frequently hurling, they broke the phalanxes of the Trojans. At that
time indeed these (the Ajaces) in the van, with their variously-wrought
armour, fought against the Trojans and brazen-armed Hector, whilst (the
Locrians) shooting from the rear, lay concealed; nor were the Trojans
any longer mindful of combat, for the arrows put them in confusion.

Then surely would the Trojans have retreated with loss from the ships
and tents to lofty Ilium, had not Polydamas, standing near, addressed
bold Hector:

"Hector, thou art impossible to be persuaded by advice.[446] Because
indeed a god hath given thee, above others, warlike deeds, for this
reason dost thou also desire to be more skilled than others in counsel?
But by no means canst thou thyself obtain all things at once.[447] To
one indeed hath the deity given warlike deeds; to another dancing; and
to another the harp and singing. To another again far-sounding Jove
implants a prudent mind in his bosom, of which many men reap the
advantage, as it (prudence) even preserves cities; and he himself (who
possesses it) especially knows (its value). Yet will I speak as appears
to me best; because the encircling host[448] of war burns round thee on
all sides, and the magnanimous Trojans, since they have crossed the
walls, some indeed stand apart with their arms, and others fight, the
fewer against the greater number, scattered amongst the ships. But
retiring back, summon hither all the chiefs. And then we can better
discuss the whole plan; whether we shall enter upon the many-benched
ships, if indeed the deity will give us victory; or depart uninjured
from the barks; because of a truth I fear lest the Greeks repay their
debt of yesterday, since a man, insatiate in war, still remains at the
ships, who I conceive will no longer abstain entirely from battle." Thus
spoke Polydamas, but the faultless advice pleased Hector; and
immediately he leaped with his armour from his chariot to the ground,
and, addressing him, spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 445: Τέμει refers to ἄροτρον in v. 703, not to ζυγόν.]

   [Footnote 446: Put for ἀμήχανόν ἐστι πείθειν σε.]

   [Footnote 447: A favourite proverb. Cf. Duport, Gnom. p. 81.]

   [Footnote 448: So "corona," in Latin.]

"Polydamas, do thou retain here all the bravest, whilst I will come back
again immediately after I have given proper orders to the [troops]." He
said, and shouting, he rushed on, like unto a snowy mountain, and flew
through the Trojans and the allies. But they all crowded round
valour-loving Polydamas, the son of Panthous, as soon as they heard the
voice of Hector. He, however, ranged through the foremost combatants,
seeking if he could anywhere find Deïphobus, the might of king Helenus,
and Adamas, the son of Asias, and Asius, the son of Hyrtacus. Some he
found no longer quite unhurt, nor yet destroyed, whilst others again lay
at the sterns of the ships of the Greeks, having lost their lives by the
hands of the Greeks; and others were stricken or wounded within the
wall. But he quickly found noble Alexander, the husband of fair-haired
Helen, on the left of the lamentable battle, cheering of his companions,
and encouraging them to fight; and, standing near, he addressed him with
reproachful words:

"Accursed Paris, fine only in person, woman-mad, seducer, where are
Deïphobus and the might of king Helenus, and Adamas, the son of Asias,
and Asius, the son of Hyrtacus? Where also is Othryoneus? Now lofty
Ilium all perishes from its summit,[449] now is its final destruction
certain."

   [Footnote 449: The Latin "a culmine," as in Virg. Æn. ii. 290,
   603. So Æsch.]

But him godlike Alexander in turn addressed: "Hector, since it is thy
intention to find fault with me when innocent, at some other time
perhaps, I may be more neglectful of the fight; [but not now], since
neither did my mother bear me altogether unwarlike. For from the time
when thou didst stir up the battle of thy companions at the ships, from
that time, remaining here, have we engaged incessantly with the Greeks;
and those comrades are dead for whom thou inquirest. Deïphobus and the
might of king Helenus alone have withdrawn, both wounded in the hand
with long spears; but the son of Saturn hath warded off death [from
them]. But now lead on, wheresoever thy heart and soul urge thee; and we
will follow with determined minds, nor do I think that thou wilt be at
all in want of valour, as much strength as is in us. It is not possible
even for one, although keenly desirous, to fight beyond his strength."

So saying, the hero persuaded the mind of his brother, and they hastened
to advance towards that place where especially was the battle and
contest; round Cebriones and excellent Polydamas, Phalces and Orthæus,
and godlike Polyphœtes, and Palmys, and Ascanius and Morys, the sons of
Hippotion, who the day before had come as a relief guard[450] from
fertile Ascania: and Jove then urged them to fight. But they marched
like unto the blast of boisterous winds, which rushes down to the plain,
urged by the thunder of father Jove, and with a dreadful tumult[451] is
mingled with the ocean; and in it [rise] many boiling billows of the
much-resounding sea, swollen, whitened with foam, first indeed some and
then others following.

   [Footnote 450: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 358. Choeph. 679: Κατ' ἄκρας
   ένθάδ' ὡς πορθούμεθα. Soph. Ant. 206: Ἠθέλησε μὲν πυρὶ πρῆσαι
   κατ' ἄκρας. Eurip. Phœn. 1192: Κατ' ἄκρων περγάμων ἑλεῖν πόλιν.]

   [Footnote 451: Πολέμου διάδοχοι, τοῖς προτέροις
   ἷσοι.--Eustathius.]

So the Trojans, first indeed some in battle array, and then others
glittering in brass, followed along with their leaders. But Hector, the
son of Priam, equal to man-slaughtering Mars, led the van, and held
before him his shield, equal on all sides, thick with skins; and much
brass was laid over it: and round his temples his gleaming helmet was
shaken. Stepping forward, he tried the phalanxes around on every side,
if perchance they would give way to him, advancing under cover of his
shield. Yet he disturbed not the courage of the Greeks in their breasts:
but Ajax, far-striding, first challenged him:

"O noble Sir, draw nearer: why dost thou thus frighten the Greeks? We
Greeks are by no means unskilful in battle, although we are subdued by
the evil scourge[452] of Jove. Thy soul, forsooth, hopes, I suppose, to
plunder the ships; but we also have hands ready to repulse thee
immediately. Assuredly, long before shall thy well-inhabited city be
taken and destroyed by our hands. But to thee thyself, I say, the time
draws near, when, flying, thou shalt pray to father Jove and the other
immortals, that thy fair-maned steeds, which shall bear thee to the
city, raising dust over the plain, may become swifter than hawks."

   [Footnote 452: See note on xii. 37.]

Whilst he was thus speaking, a bird flew over him on the right--a
lofty-flying eagle; upon which the people of the Greeks shouted,
encouraged by the omen; but illustrious Hector replied:

"O babbling and vain-boasting Ajax, what hast thou said? Would that I
were as sure of becoming for ever the child of ægis-bearing Jove, that
the venerable Juno had borne me, and that I were honoured as Minerva and
Apollo are honoured, as that this day now certainly brings destruction
upon all the Greeks; and among others thou shalt be slain, if thou wilt
dare to abide my long spear, which shall tear for thee thy dainty
person, and thou shalt satiate the dogs and birds of the Trojans with
thy fat and flesh, falling at the ships of the Greeks."

Thus then having spoken, he led on; and they followed along with him
with a mighty shout, and the troops likewise shouted in the rear. The
Greeks, on the other side, raised a shout, nor were they forgetful of
their valour, but they awaited the bravest of the Trojans, assaulting.
But the clamour of both reached to the æther and the shining
splendour[453] of Jove.

   [Footnote 453: Cf. Pind. Ol. iii. 43: Αὐγαῖς ἁλίου. So "auras
   ætherias," Virg. Georg. ii. 291. Lucret. i. 208, "Dias-luminis
   auras."--Kennedy.]




                         BOOK THE FOURTEENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Agamemnon and the other wounded chiefs visit the battle with Nestor.
Juno, having borrowed the cestus of Venus, first obtains the assistance
of Sleep, and then hastens to Ida to inveigle Jove. She prevails, Jove
sleeps, and Neptune seizes the opportunity to aid the Trojans.


But the shouting did not entirely escape the notice of Nestor, although
drinking, but he addressed winged words to the son of Æsculapius:
"Consider, noble Machaon, how these things will be; greater, certainly,
[grows] the shouting of the blooming youths at the ships. But sitting
here at present, drink indeed the dark wine, until fair-haired Hecamede
has warmed the tepid baths, and washed away the bloody gore; whilst I,
going with speed to a watchtower, will gain information."

So saying, he took the well-made shield of his own son, horse-breaking
Thrasymedes, [which was] lying in the tent, all shining with brass (for
he had the shield of his sire); and seized a strong spear, pointed with
sharp brass; and stood without the tent, and soon beheld an unseemly
deed,--these [the Greeks] in confusion, and those, the haughty Trojans,
routing them in the rear; but the wall of the Greeks had fallen. And as
when the vast deep blackens with the noiseless[454] wave, foreboding
with no effect, the rapid courses of the shrill blasts, nor yet is it
rolled forwards or backwards, before some decisive blast comes down from
Jove: so meditated the old man, distracted in his mind between two
opinions: whether he should go amongst the throng of fleet-horsed
Greeks, or to Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, shepherd of the people. But
to him thus reflecting, it appeared better to go in quest of the son of
Atreus. Meanwhile they kept slaughtering each other, contending, and the
solid brass around their bodies rang, as they were stricken with the
swords and two-edged spears.

   [Footnote 454: Literally, "deaf." So "surdi fluctus," Ovid,
   Epist. xviii. 211; "Omnia surda tacent," Propert. iv. 3, 53;
   "Surdaque vota condidit Ionio," Pers. Sat. vi. 28.]

But the Jove-cherished kings, coming up from the vessels, met Nestor, as
many as had been wounded with the brass,--Tydides, and Ulysses, and
Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. Their ships indeed were drawn up upon the
shore of the hoary deep, very far away from the battle; for they had
drawn the first as far as the plain, and had built a wall at their
sterns. For, broad as it was, the shore was by no means able to contain
their vessels, and the people were crowded. Wherefore they drew them up
in rows one behind the other, and filled the wide mouth of the whole
shore, as much as the promontories enclosed. There then were they
walking together, leaning upon the spear, in order to behold the tumult
and the battle; and the heart in their bosoms was grieved. But aged
Nestor met them, and terrified the souls in the breasts of the Greeks:
whom first king Agamemnon addressing, said:

"O Neleïan Nestor, great glory of the Greeks, why, leaving the
man-destroying battle, comest thou hither? Truly I fear lest impetuous
Hector make good his speech, as once he threatened, haranguing among the
Trojans, that he would not return to Ilium from the ships, before that
he had burned the ships with fire, and slain us also: thus indeed he
harangued; and now are all things fulfilling. Ye gods, surely the other
well-greaved Greeks, as well as Achilles, store up wrath against me in
their minds; nor are they willing to fight at the sterns of the ships."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "Assuredly these
things are in active accomplishment, nor could even lofty-thundering
Jove himself contrive them otherwise; for the wall, in which we trusted
that it would be an impregnable defence to the ships and to ourselves,
has now fallen. But they are sustaining an obstinate contest at the
swift ships; nor couldst thou any longer distinguish, though examining
particularly, on which side the Greeks, confounded, are routed; so
promiscuously are they slain, whilst the shout reaches heaven. Let us,
however, deliberate how these things will be, if counsel avail anything;
although I advise not that we enter the battle; for it is by no means
proper that a wounded man should fight."

But him then answered Agamemnon, king of men. "Nestor, since they are
combating at the sterns of the ships, and the constructed rampart avails
not, nor the ditch, at which the Greeks suffered much, and hoped in
their minds that it would be an impregnable defence to the ships and to
themselves, surely it will be agreeable to all-powerful Jove that the
Greeks perish here, inglorious, far away from Argos. For I was conscious
when he willingly gave assistance to the Greeks, and I now know that he
honours those [the Trojans] equally with the happy gods, but hath
fettered our courage and our hands. But come, let us all obey as I shall
advise. Let us draw down the ships, as many as are drawn up first near
the sea, and launch them all into the vast ocean. Let us moor them at
anchor in the deep, till mortal-deceiving[455] night arrive, if even
then the Trojans may abstain from battle, and then we may perhaps draw
down all the vessels; for there is no disgrace in flying from evil, not
even during the night. It is better for a flying man to escape from
evil, than to be taken."

   [Footnote 455: 'Αβρότη is akin to ἤμβροτον from άμαρτάνω, and
   therefore = "making mortals go astray," or else = άμβροσιη in ii.
   57. See Buttm. Lexil. p. 82. Or it may be regarded as the "nox
   intempesta," _i.e._ "muita nox, qua nihil agi tempestivum est,"
   Censorinus de Die Nat. xxiv.]

But him sternly regarding, wise Ulysses then addressed: "Son of Atreus,
what speech hath escaped thy lips? Lost man! thou shouldst command some
worthless army, and not rule over us, to whom Jove hath granted, from
youth even unto old age, to accomplish toilsome wars, until we, each of
us, shall perish. Dost thou then desire thus to leave wide-wayed Troy,
on account of which we have endured so many woes? Be silent, lest some
other of the Greeks hear a speech, which a man ought not to have brought
through his mouth, whoever understands in his mind how to speak prudent
things, who is a sceptre-bearer, and whom so many people obey, as many
as thou dost govern among the Greeks. For now do I reprobate thy
judgment, in what thou hast said; who commandest us, whilst the war and
battle are waged, to draw down the well-benched ships to the sea, in
order that the wishes of the Trojans may be still better fulfilled,
victorious though they be, and dire destruction fall upon us: for the
Greeks will not maintain the fight whilst the ships are being dragged to
the sea, but will look back, and retire from the combat. Then will thy
counsel be injurious, O leader of the people."

But him Agamemnon, the king of men, then answered: "Much, O Ulysses,
hast thou touched me to the soul with thy severe reproof; yet I
commanded not the sons of the Greeks against their will to draw the
well-benched ships down to the sea. But now would that there were one,
either young or old, who would deliver an opinion better than this; it
would be to my joy." [456]

But among them Diomede, valiant in the din of battle, also spoke: "The
man is near, we need not seek far, if indeed ye are willing to be
persuaded; and do not find fault each through wrath, because I am by
birth the youngest amongst you; for I boast that my race is from a noble
sire, Tydeus, whom the heaped-up earth[457] covers at Thebes. For to
Portheus were born three distinguished sons, and they dwelt in Pleuron
and lofty Calydon: Agrius and Melas, but the third was the knight Œneus,
the father of my father, who was conspicuous among them for valour. He
indeed remained there, but my father, as an exile, dwelt at Argos, for
so Jove willed and the other gods. But he married [one] of the
daughters[458] of Adrastus, and he inhabited a mansion opulent in
resources, and corn-bearing fields were his in abundance, and there were
many rows[459] of plants around him. Numerous were his herds, and he
surpassed the Greeks in the use of the spear; but these things ye ought
to know, since it is a truth. Do not, therefore, dispute the opinion
freely delivered, which I give advisedly, deeming that I am base by
birth, and unwarlike. Come, then, let us go to battle, wounded as we
are, from necessity. There, then, let us ourselves approach the combat,
out [of the reach] of weapons, lest any one receive wound upon wound;
and, encouraging others, we will urge them on, who hitherto, gratifying
their souls, have stood apart, nor fought."

   [Footnote 456: For this use of the dative, cf. Plato Phædon, §
   24. So Tacit. Agric. "Quibus bellum volentibus erat."--Kennedy.
   Cf. Æsch. Prom. s.i., ἀσμένῳ δέ σοι Ἡ ποικιλείμων νῦζ ἀποκρύψει
   φάος.]

   [Footnote 457: See my note on Od. ii. p. 21, n. 35, ed. Bohn, and
   an admirable dissertation on these classic barrow-tombs in
   Stephen's notes on Saxo-Grammaticus, pp. 90-92.]

   [Footnote 458: Deipyle. See Scholiast.]

   [Footnote 459: Not "gardens." Schol. Theocrit. i. 48. Ὄρχατον τὴν
   ἐπιστιχον φυτείαν ... καὶ Αριστοφάνης τὸ μεταξὺ τῶν φυτῶν
   μετόρχμιον ἐκάλεσεν ἐν τοῖς γεωργοῖς' καὶ Ἡσίοδος ὄρχον λέγει τὴν
   ἐπιστιχον τῶν ἀμπέλων φυτείαν. Cf. Schol. on Lycophr. 857;
   Hesych. t. ii. p. 792.]

Thus he spoke; and to him they all listened readily, and obeyed.
Wherefore they hastened to advance, and the king of men, Agamemnon, led
them.

Nor did the illustrious Earth-shaker keep a negligent look-out, but he
went amongst them like unto an aged man, and he caught the right hand of
Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, and addressing him, spoke winged words:

"Son of Atreus, now perchance the revengeful heart of Achilles rejoices
in his breast, beholding the slaughter and rout of the Greeks; since
there is no feeling in him, not even a little. May he, however, thus
perish, and may a god cover him with disgrace. But with thee the blessed
gods are not yet altogether enraged, but again the leaders and chiefs of
the Trojans will perchance raise the dust upon the wide plain, and thou
wilt behold them flying towards the city from the ships and the tents."

So saying, he shouted aloud, rushing over the plain. As loud as nine or
ten thousand men shout, beginning the contest of Mars, so loud a cry did
king Neptune send forth from his breast; and he cast great resolution
into every heart among the Greeks, to war and to fight incessantly.

But golden-throned Juno, standing, looked down with her eyes from the
summit of Olympus, and immediately recognized her own brother, [who
was] also her brother-in-law, exerting himself through the glorious
battle, and she rejoiced in her mind. She also beheld Jove sitting upon
the highest top of many-rilled Ida, and he was hateful to her soul. Then
the venerable large-eyed Juno next anxiously considered how she could
beguile the mind of ægis-bearing Jove. And now this plan appeared best
to her mind, to proceed to Ida, having well arrayed herself, if
perchance he might desire to lie beside her form[460] in dalliance, so
that she might pour upon his eyelids and vigilant mind careless and
genial sleep. And she proceeded to her chamber, which Vulcan, her dear
son, had made for her, and had fitted the thick doors to the lintels
with a secret bolt;[461] and this no other god could remove. There
entering in, she closed the shining doors. First she washed all
impurities from her lovely person with rich oil, ambrosial,[462] and
anointed herself with rich oil, ambrosial and agreeable,[463] which was
odoriferous to her; and the perfume of which, when shaken in the
brazen-floored[464] mansion of Jove, reached even to earth and to
heaven. With this having anointed her body, and having also combed her
hair, with her hands she arranged her shining locks, beautiful,
ambrosial, [which flowed] from her immortal head. Next she threw around
her an ambrosial robe, which Minerva had wrought[465] for her in
needlework, and had embroidered much varied work upon it, and she
fastened it upon her breast with golden clasps. Then she girded herself
with a zone, adorned with a hundred fringes, and in her well-perforated
ears placed her triple-gemmed, elaborate,[466]earrings, and much grace
shone from [her]. From above she, divine of goddesses, covered herself
with a veil, beautiful, newly wrought, and it was bright as the sun; and
beneath her shining feet she fastened her beautiful sandals. But when
she had arranged all her ornaments around her person, she proceeded
straight from her chamber; and having called Venus apart from the other
gods, addressed her in speech:

   [Footnote 460: Construe παραδραθέειν ᾖ χροιῇ.]

   [Footnote 461: Respecting the different meanings of κλεὶς, see
   Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 462: See Buttm. Lexil. p 81, 3.]

   [Footnote 463: Buttmann, p. 242, regards έδανὸς as "perhaps a
   stronger and higher meaning of ἐός, or ἒός, _good_, which may be
   compared with οὐτιδανός, μηκεδανός."]

   [Footnote 464: See my note on Od. ii. 2.]

   [Footnote 465: "The proper sense of ἔξυσε is, _scraped_ or
   _rubbed over_ and its use here is best explained by supposing a
   reference to some process among the ancients whereby a shining
   appearance was given to their vestments, as by _calendering_ or
   _glazing_ with us."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 466: Μορόεντα, περὶ ἃ ἐμόρησεν ὁ τεχνίτης.--Schol.]

"Wilt thou now be at all obedient to me, dear child, in what I shall
say? Or wilt thou refuse, enraged in thy mind on this account, because I
aid the Greeks whilst thou [aidest] the Trojans?"

But her Venus, the daughter of Jove, then answered: "Juno, venerable
goddess, daughter of mighty Saturn, declare whatsoever thou dost
meditate; for my mind urges me to accomplish it, if indeed I can
accomplish it, and if it be practicable."

But her the venerable Juno, meditating guile, addressed: "Give now to me
that loveliness and desire with which thou dost subdue all, immortals,
and mortal men; for I go to visit the limits of the fertile earth, and
Oceanus, the parent of the gods, and mother Tethys; who, receiving me
from Rhea, nurtured and educated me with care in their abodes, when
far-resounding Jove cast down Saturn beneath the earth and the fruitless
sea. These I go to visit, and I will put an end to eternal
quarrels.[467] For already have they abstained for a length of time from
the couch and embrace of each other, since anger fell upon their mind.
But if, by persuading their hearts by my words, I should lead them back
to the bed, to be united in love, then should I always be called by them
beloved and revered."

   [Footnote 467: These passages were regarded by the ancients as
   referring to the perpetual strife of the elements. Thus Plato,
   in Theætet. says: Ὅμηρος εἰπὼν, Ὠκεανόν τε θεῶν γένεσιν, καὶ
   μητέρα Τηθὺν, πάντα εἴρηκεν ἔκγονα ροῆς τε καὶ κινήσεως. See
   Sextus Empir. adv. Grammat. i. 13, p. 280, ed. Fabr.; Stobæus,
   Ecl. i. 11. Grote, vol. i. p. 16, note, observes that, "Oceanus
   and Tethys seem to be presented in the Iliad as the primitive
   father and mother of the gods," although he says that "Uranos and
   Gæa, like Oceanus, Tethys, and Nyx, are with Homer great and
   venerable gods, but neither the one nor the other present the
   character of predecessors of Kronos and Zeus."]

But her laughter-loving Venus in turn addressed: "It is not possible nor
becoming to refuse thy request, for thou reclinest in the arms of
mightiest Jove."

She said, and loosed from her bosom the embroidered, variegated
cestus;[468] where all allurements were enclosed. In it were love, and
desire, converse, seductive speech, which steals away the mind even of
the very prudent. This then she placed in her hands, spoke, and
addressed her:

"Take[469] this, now place in thy bosom this variegated belt, in which
all things are contained; and I think that thou wilt not return with thy
object unaccomplished, whatsoever thou desirest in thy mind."

   [Footnote 468: I have avoided translating "cestus," as it is very
   doubtful what is meant by it. It could not have been an ordinary
   girdle, since it was to be hidden in the bosom (ver. 219), and
   since its power appears to have been secret. See Heyne's note.]

   [Footnote 469: Τῆ is an old imperative from a root ΤΑ--"formed
   like ζῆν, according to Doric analogy.... In all cases it stands
   either quite absolute, that is, with the object understood, or
   the accusative belongs to a verb immediately following."--Buttm.
   Lexil. pp. 505, sq.]

Thus she spake, and the large-eyed, venerable Juno smiled, and smiling,
then placed it in her bosom. But Venus, the daughter of Jove, departed
to the palace; and Juno, hastening, quitted the summit of Olympus, and,
having passed over Pieria and fertile Emathia, she hastened over the
snowy mountains of equestrian Thrace, most lofty summits, nor did she
touch the ground with her feet. From Athos she descended to the foaming
deep, and came to Lemnos, the city of divine Thoas, where she met Sleep,
the brother of Death; to whose hand she then clung, and spoke, and
addressed him:

"O Sleep,[470] king of all gods and all men,[471] if ever indeed thou
didst listen to my entreaty, now too be persuaded; and I will
acknowledge gratitude to thee all my days. Close immediately in sleep
for me the bright eyes of Jove under his eyelids, after I couch with him
in love; and I will give thee, as gifts, a handsome golden throne, for
ever incorruptible. And my limping son, Vulcan, adorning it, shall make
it, and below thy feet he shall place a footstool, upon which thou
mayest rest thy shining feet while feasting."

   [Footnote 470: Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 214. The dying words of Gorgias
   of Leontium are very elegant: Ἤδε με ὁ ὕπνος ἄρχεται
   παρακατατίθεσθαι τῶ ἀδελφῳ.--Ælian, Var. Hist. ii. 35.]

   [Footnote 471: So in the Orphic hymn: Ὕπνε, ἄναξ πάντων μακάρων
   θνητῶν τ' άνθρώπων.]

But her sweet Sleep answering, addressed: "Juno, venerable goddess,
daughter of great Saturn, any other of the everlasting gods could I
easily lull to sleep, and even the flowing of rapid Ocean, who is the
parent of all; but I could not approach Saturnian Jove, nor lull him to
sleep, unless, at least, he himself command me. For once already, at
least, has he terrified me by his threats, on that day when the
magnanimous son of Jove (Hercules) sailed from Ilium, having sacked the
city of the Trojans. Then I lulled the mind of ægis-bearing Jove, being
poured gently around him, whilst thou wast planning evils in thy mind
[against the hero], rousing the blasts of bitter winds over the deep;
and thou didst afterwards carry him away apart from all his friends to
well-inhabited Cos. But he, when awakened, was enraged, hurling about
the gods through his mansion, and me chiefly of all he sought, and would
have cast me down, a lost one, from the æther into the deep, had not
Night, vanquisher of gods and men, preserved me, to whom I came flying.
So he restrained himself, angry as he was; for he dreaded lest he should
do things which were disagreeable to swift[472] Night. And now again
dost thou urge me to perform this another dangerous deed."

But him the venerable large-eyed Juno in turn answered: "O Sleep, why
thinkest thou these things within thy mind? Canst thou suppose that
far-sounding Jove favours the Trojans, as he was enraged on account of
Hercules, his own son? But come, [do this], and I will give thee one of
the younger Graces to wed, and to be called thy spouse, Pasithea,[473]
whom thou fondly desirest day after day."

   [Footnote 472: But see Buttm. Lexil. p. 369. Translate, "quick
   and fearful night."]

   [Footnote 473: The most beautiful of the Graces,--"blandarum
   prima sororum," according to Statius, Theb. ii. 286. Cf. Virg.
   Æn. i. 267, sqq.]

Thus she spoke; but Sleep was delighted, and, answering, addressed her:
"Come now, swear to me by the inviolable water of the Styx, and touch
with one hand the fertile earth, and with the other the marble sea; so
that all the gods beneath, around Saturn, may be witnesses between us,
that thou wilt surely give me one of the younger Graces, Pasithea, whom
I will desire all my days."

Thus he spoke, nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey, but she
swore as he desired, and named all gods who dwell under Tartarus, which
are called Titans.[474] When then she had sworn, and performed her oath,
they both proceeded, leaving the city of Lemnos and Imbrus, mantled in
haze, quickly making their way; and they came to Ida of many rills, the
mother of wild beasts, to Lectos, where first they quitted the sea: but
they both advanced over the land, and the summit of the wood was shaken
beneath their feet. There Sleep on his part remained, before the eyes of
Jove should perceive him; ascending a lofty fir, which then growing the
highest upon Ida, sprung up through the air to the clouds. There he sat,
thickly covered with the fir branches, like unto a shrill bird, which,
living in the mountains, the gods call Chalcis, and men Cymindis.

   [Footnote 474: On this oath, see Grote, vol. i. p. 17.]

But Juno proceeded hastily to Gargarus, the summit of lofty Ida, and
cloud-compelling Jove beheld her. But the instant he beheld her, that
instant[475] desire entirely shadowed around his august mind, just as
when they first were united in love, retiring to the bed, without the
knowledge of their dear parents. And he stood before her, and spoke, and
addressed her:

"Wherefore hastening from Olympus, Juno, comest thou hither, but thy
horses and chariot are not near, which thou mayest ascend."

   [Footnote 475: Cf. Theocrit. ii. 82: Ὡς ἴδον, ώς ἐμάνην, ώς μεῦ
   περὶ θυμὸς ἴάφθη. iii. 42: Ὡς ἴδον, ὡς ἐμάνη. Ovid, Epist. xii.
   33: "Ut vidi, ut perii, nec notis ignibus arsi."]

But him the venerable Juno, meditating guiles, addressed; "I go to visit
the limits of the fertile earth, and Oceanus, the parent of the gods,
and mother Tethys, who nurtured and trained me with care in their
palaces. Them I go to see, and will take away their bitter quarrels. For
already they abstain a long while from the couch and embrace of each
other; since anger has invaded their minds. But my steeds, which will
bear me over dry and wet, stand near the base of Ida with many rills.
Now, however, on thy account have I come hither from Olympus, lest
perchance thou shouldst afterwards be angry with me, were I to depart in
secret to the abode of deep-flowing Oceanus?"

But her cloud-collecting Jove answering, addressed: "Juno, thither thou
canst go even by-and-by, but come [now], let us, reclining, be delighted
with love; for never at any time did the love of a goddess or a woman,
poured around the heart within my breast, so subdue me: neither when I
loved the wife of Ixion, who bore Pirithous, a counsellor equal to the
gods; nor when [I loved] fair-ankled Danaë, the daughter of Acrisius,
who bore Perseus, most illustrious of all men; nor when with that of the
celebrated daughter of Phoenix,[476] who bore to me Minos and godlike
Rhadamanthus:[477] nor yet when [I loved] Semele, nor Alcmena in Thebes,
who brought forth my valiant son Hercules: but Semele bore [me] Bacchus,
a joy to mortals: nor when [I loved] Ceres, the fair-haired queen: nor
when glorious Latona nor thyself; as I now love thee, and sweet desire
seizes me."

   [Footnote 476: But Europa is generally considered to be the
   daughter of Agenor. See Grote, vol. i. p. 350.]

   [Footnote 477: On the career of Rhadamanthus, who is "after death
   promoted to an abode of undisturbed bliss in the Elysian plain at
   the extremity of the earth," see Grote, vol. i. p. 300.]

But him venerable Juno, meditating guiles, addressed: "Most shameless
son of Saturn, what word hast thou spoken? If now thou desire to recline
in love upon the summit of Ida, where all places are exposed, how will
it be, if any of the immortal gods should perceive us sleeping, and,
going amongst all the gods, disclose it? I for my part could never
return to thy mansion, arising from the couch; for surely it would be
unbecoming. But if in truth thou desirest it, and it be agreeable to thy
soul, there is a chamber of thine which Vulcan, thy beloved son, formed
for thee, and fitted its secure doors to its lintels. Thither let us
repair, about to recline, since an embrace is indeed thy desire."

But her cloud-collecting Jove, answering, addressed:

"Fear not, O Juno, that any of either gods or men shall behold this.
Such a golden cloud will I spread around, that not even the Sun may see
us through it, although his eye is very keen to behold." [478]

Thus he spake, and the son of Saturn encircled his wife in his arms. And
the divine earth produced[479] fresh herbage under them, the dewy lotus,
and the crocus, and the hyacinth, close and soft, which elevated them
from the earth. Upon this [couch] they reclined, and clothed themselves
above with a beautiful golden cloud; and lucid dew-drops fell from it.

   [Footnote 478: On the god Hêlios, and his overseeing influence,
   the student should compare Grote, vol. i. p. 466.]

   [Footnote 479: So Milton, describing the couch of our first
   parents, P. L. iv. 700:--

                 ----"underfoot the violet,
           Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
           Broider'd the ground."]

Thus quietly slumbered the sire upon the summit of Gargarus, subdued by
sleep and love, and held his spouse in his arms. But sweet Sleep
hastened to run to the ships of the Greeks, that he might deliver a
message to Neptune, the shaker of the earth. And, standing near, he
addressed to him winged words:

"Now, Neptune, heartily give aid to the Greeks, and bestow glory upon
them, at least for a little, whilst yet Jove sleeps; since I have
enveloped him in a veil[480] of soft slumber, and Juno hath deceived
[him], that he might sleep in love."

   [Footnote 480: Observe the force of περικάλυψα.]

So saying, he indeed departed to the illustrious tribes of men; but he
still more impelled [Neptune] to assist the Greeks, and immediately
springing forward far into the van, he exhorted them:

"O Greeks, yet again do we yield the victory to Hector, the son of
Priam, that he may seize the ships and bear away glory? For so indeed he
supposes and boasts, because Achilles remains at the hollow ships,
enraged at heart. However, there would not be a great need of him, if
the rest of us were incited to assist one another. But come? let us all
obey as I shall advise. Let us, clad with shields, as many as are best
and greatest in the army, who are covered as to our heads with
glittering helmets, and hold the longest spears in our hands, advance,
and I will lead the way; nor do I think that Hector, the son of Priam,
will await us, though very eager. Whatsoever man also is obstinate in
the fight, and bears but a small shield upon his shoulder, let him give
it to an inferior man, and let him clothe himself in a larger shield."

Thus he spoke; but they listened to him readily, and obeyed. The kings
themselves, Tydides, Ulysses, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus, marshalled
[the troops], wounded as they were; and, going about among them all,
exchanged their martial arms, the brave [soldier] put on the good
[armour], and the worse they gave to the inferior man. But when they had
girded the splendid brass around their bodies, they began to advance;
and earth-shaking Neptune led them on, grasping in his firm hand a
dreadful tapering sword, like unto a thunderbolt, with which [sword] it
is not possible to engage in destructive battle, for the fear [of it]
restrains men.

On the other side again illustrious Hector drew up the Trojans. Then
truly azure-haired Neptune and illustrious Hector drew forth the
severest struggle of war, the one indeed aiding the Trojans, and the
other the Greeks. But the sea was dashed up to the tents and ships of
the Greeks and they engaged with a mighty shout. Not so loudly does the
billow of the ocean roar against the main land, when driven from the
deep by the rough blast of Boreas; nor so great is the crackling of
blazing fire in the glens of a mountain, when it is raised aloft to
consume the wood; nor so loud howls the wind amidst the high-foliaged
oaks (which, in particular, loudly roars in its wrath), as was the cry
of the Trojans and Greeks shouting dreadfully, when they rushed one upon
the other.

At Ajax illustrious Hector first took aim with his spear, as he was
turned right against him; nor did he miss. [He struck him] where the two
belts were crossed upon his breast, both that of the shield and that of
the silver-studded sword; for these protected the tender skin: but
Hector was enraged because his swift weapon had fled from his hand in
vain, and he retired back into the crowd of his companions, shunning
death. At him then, retiring, mighty Telamonian Ajax [threw] with a
stone, for [stones] in great numbers were rolled about among the feet of
the combatants, props for the fleet barks; lifting up one of these, he
struck him upon the breast, above the orb of the shield, near the neck.
And, throwing, he twirled it like a top, and it (the stone) rolled round
on all sides. As when, beneath a violent stroke from father Jove, an oak
falls uprooted, and a terrible smell of sulphur arises from it; but
confidence no longer possesses the man, whosoever being near beholds it,
because the thunderbolt of mighty Jove is terrible: so rapidly upon the
ground fell the might of Hector in the dust. And he dropped his spear
from his hand, his shield and helmet followed above him, and his armour,
variegated with brass, rang upon him. Then the sons of the Greeks,
loudly shouting, rushed in, hoping to draw him off, and they hurled
numerous javelins; but no one was able either to strike from a distance,
or to smite close at hand, the shepherd of the people, for the bravest
[of the warriors], Polydamas, Æneas, and noble Agenor, Sarpedon, leader
of the Lycians, and illustrious Glaucus, first threw themselves round
him. And no one of the rest neglected him, but they held their
well-orbed shields before him. But his companions, up-raising him in
their hands, bore him out of the conflict, till they reached his fleet
horses, which stood for him in rear of the combat and the war, holding
both the charioteer and the variegated car; which then carried him
towards the city, groaning heavily.[481]

   [Footnote 481: Milton, P.L. vi. 335:--

      "Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
      By angels many and strong, who interposed
      Defence, while others bore him on their shields
      Back to his chariot, where it stood retired
      From off the files of war; there they him laid,
      Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame."]

But when now they came to the ford of the rapid-flowing current of
eddying Xanthus, whom immortal Jove begat, there they removed him from
his car to the ground, and poured water over him; but he breathed again,
and looked up with his eyes; and, sitting upon his knees, disgorged
black blood. Again he fell back upon the ground, and dark night
overshadowed his eyes; for the blow still subdued his spirits.

But when the Greeks saw Hector going apart, they pressed the more on the
Trojans, and were mindful of contest. Then swift Oïlean Ajax before
others, leaping forward with his fir-tree spear, wounded Satnius, son of
Enops, whom a Naiad, the fairest nymph, bore to Enops, when keeping his
flocks by the banks of Satnio. Him the spear-renowned son of Oïleus,
drawing near, wounded in the flank; but he fell supine, and round him
the Trojans and Greeks engaged in a valiant battle. But to him
spear-brandishing Polydamas, son of Panthous, came as an avenger, and
smote Prothoënor, son of Areïlochus, upon the right shoulder. The tough
spear passed on through his shoulder, but falling in the dust, he
grasped the earth with his hand. And Polydamas boasted mightily over
him, shouting aloud:

"I do not think, indeed, that the weapon hath fled vainly from the
sturdy hand of the magnanimous son of Panthous, but some one of the
Greeks has received it in his body; and I think that he, leaning upon
it, will descend to the mansion of Pluto."

Thus he spoke, but grief arose among the Greeks at his boasting, and
particularly agitated the mind of warlike Ajax, the son of Telamon, for
he had fallen very near him; and he immediately hurled with his shining
spear at him departing. Polydamas himself indeed avoided black fate,
springing off obliquely; but Archilochus, son of Antenor, received [the
blow], for to him the gods had doomed destruction. Him then he struck
upon the last vertebra, in the joining of the head and neck, and he
disjoined both tendons; but the head, the mouth, and the nostrils of him
falling, met the ground much sooner than his legs and knees. Then Ajax
in turn cried out to blameless Polydamas:

"Reflect, O Polydamas, and tell me the truth; is not this man worthy to
be slain in exchange of Prothoënor? He appears not to me indeed a
coward, nor [sprung] from cowards, but [to be] the brother or the son of
horse-breaking Antenor, for he seems most like him as to his race."

Thus he spoke, well knowing [him], but grief possessed the minds of the
Trojans. Then Acamas, stalking round his brother, wounded with his spear
Promachus, the Bœotian; whilst he was dragging him off by the feet. But
over him Acamas greatly boasted, calling out aloud:

"Ye Argive archers,[482] insatiable in threats, assuredly not to us
alone will toil and sorrow accrue, but thus thou also wilt at some time
be slain. Consider how your Promachus sleeps, subdued by my spear, that
a requital for my brother might not be long unpaid. Therefore should a
man wish a brother to be left in his family, as an avenger of his
death."

   [Footnote 482: See note on iv. 242.]

Thus he spoke; but grief arose among the Greeks as he boasted, and he
particularly agitated the mind of warlike Peneleus. Accordingly he
rushed upon Acamas, who awaited not the charge of king Peneleus; but he
wounded Ilioneus, son of Phorbas, rich in flocks, whom Mercury loved
most of all the Trojans, and had presented with possessions; and to whom
his mother bore Ilioneus alone. Him then he wounded below the brow, in
the socket of the eye, and he forced out the pupil: but the spear went
forward through the eye, and through the back of the head; and he sat
down, stretching out both his hands. But Peneleus, drawing his sharp
sword, smote him upon the middle of the neck, and lopped off his head
with its helmet to the ground, and the strong spear still remained in
his eye. But he (Peneleus), holding it up like a poppy, shouted to the
Trojans, and boasting spoke thus:

"Tell for me, ye Trojans, the beloved father and mother of illustrious
Ilioneus, that they may lament him in their halls; for neither shall the
wife of Promachus, the son of Alegenor, present herself with joy to her
dear husband coming [back], when we, sons of the Greeks, return from
Troy with our ships."

Thus he spoke; but pale fear seized upon them all, and each gazed about,
[seeking] where he might escape utter destruction.

Tell me now, ye muses, possessing Olympian dwellings, which of the
Greeks now first bore away gore-stained spoils of men, when the
illustrious Earth-shaker turned the [tide of] battle.

Telamonian Ajax then first wounded Hyrtius, son of Gyrtias, leader of
the undaunted Mysians; and Antilochus spoiled Phalces and Mermerus;
Meriones slew Morys and Hippotion; and Teucer slew Prothous and
Periphœtes. But the son of Atreus next wounded upon the flank Hyperenor,
the shepherd of the people, and the spear, cutting its way, drank his
entrails; and his soul, expelled, fled in haste through the inflicted
wound, and darkness veiled his eyes. But Ajax, the swift son of Oïleus,
slew the most; because there was not one equal to him on foot, to follow
the flying men, when Jove had excited flight amongst them.




                          BOOK THE FIFTEENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Jove awaking, and finding the Trojans routed, menaces Juno. He then
sends Iris to desire Neptune to relinquish the battle, and Apollo to
restore Hector to health. Armed with the ægis, Apollo puts the Greeks to
flight; who are pursued home to their fleet, while Telamonian Ajax slays
twelve Trojans who were bringing fire to burn it.


But after the fugitives had crossed both the ramparts and the trench,
and many were subdued by the hands of the Greeks, the rest were at
length detained, waiting beside their chariots, pallid with fear, and
terrified. But Jove arose on the summits of Ida, from beside
golden-throned Juno; and starting up, he stood and beheld the Trojans
and Greeks, those indeed in confusion, and the Greeks throwing them into
confusion in the rear; and amongst them king Neptune. Hector he beheld
lying upon the plain, and his companions sat round him:[483] but he was
afflicted with grievous difficulty of respiration, and devoid of his
senses,[484] vomiting blood, for it was not the weakest of the Greeks
who had wounded him. The father of men and gods, seeing, pitied him, and
sternly regarding Juno, severely addressed her:

"O Juno, of evil arts, impracticable, thy stratagem has made noble
Hector cease from battle, and put his troops to flight. Indeed I know
not whether again thou mayest not be the first to reap the fruits of thy
pernicious machinations, and I may chastise thee with stripes. Dost thou
not remember when thou didst swing from on high, and I hung two anvils
from thy feet, and bound a golden chain around thy hands, that could not
be broken? And thou didst hang in the air and clouds, and the gods
commiserated thee throughout lofty Olympus; but standing around, they
were not able to release thee; but whomsoever I caught, seizing, I
hurled from the threshold [of heaven], till he reached the earth, hardly
breathing. Nor even thus did my vehement anger, through grief for divine
Hercules, leave me; whom thou, prevailing upon the storms, with the
north wind, didst send over the unfruitful sea, designing evils, and
afterwards bore him out of his course, to well-inhabited Cos. I
liberated him, indeed, and brought him back thence to steed-nourishing
Argos, although having accomplished many toils. These things will I
again recall to thy memory, that thou mayest cease from deceits; in
order that thou mayest know whether the intercourse and a couch will
avail thee, in which thou wast mingled, coming apart from the gods, and
having deceived me."

   [Footnote 483: Δὴ here has the force of _demum_.]

   [Footnote 484: Ἐξεστηκὼς τῇ ψυχῇ.--Scholiast.]

Thus he spoke; but venerable large-eyed Juno shuddered, and, addressing
him, spoke winged words:

"Be witness now, Earth, and boundless Heaven above, and the water of
Styx gliding beneath, which is the greatest and most dreaded oath
amongst the blessed gods; likewise thy sacred head, and our own nuptial
couch, by which I would not rashly swear at any time, that it is not by
my instigation that earth-shaking Neptune harasses the Trojans and
Hector, and aids the other side; but certainly his own mind incites and
orders him; for, beholding the Greeks oppressed at the ships, he took
compassion on them. And even him would I advise to go there, where thou,
O Cloud-collector, mayest command."

Thus she spoke; but the father of men and gods smiled, and answering
her, spoke winged words:

"If indeed thou from henceforth, O venerable, large-eyed Juno, wouldst
sit amongst the immortals, being of the same mind with me, then truly
would Neptune, even although he very much wishes otherwise, immediately
change his mind to the same point, to thy wish and mine. But if indeed
thou speakest in sincerity and truly, go now to the assemblies of the
gods, and call Iris to come hither, and Apollo, renowned in archery,
that she may go to the people of the brazen-mailed Greeks, and tell king
Neptune, ceasing from battle, to repair to his own palaces; but let
Phœbus Apollo excite Hector to battle, and breathe strength into him
again, and make him forgetful of the pains which now afflict him in his
mind: but let him again put the Greeks to flight, exciting unwarlike
panic [amongst them], and, flying, let them fall back upon the
many-benched ships of Achilles, the son of Peleus. Then shall he
stimulate his companion Patroclus, whom illustrious Hector shall slay
with his spear before Ilium, [Patroclus] having slain many other youths,
and with them my son, noble Sarpedon; but noble Achilles shall slay
Hector. From this time forward will I always continually effect for
thee, that there shall be a retreat [of the Trojans] from the ships,
until the Greeks, by the counsels of Minerva, shall take lofty Ilium.
However, I shall not abate my anger, nor will I here permit any of the
immortals to assist the Greeks, before that the request of the son of
Peleus be completed; as first I promised to him, and nodded assent with
my head, on that day when the goddess Thetis touched my knees,
beseeching me that I would honour Achilles, the destroyer of cities."

Thus he spoke, nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey, but went
down from the Idæan mountains to lofty Olympus. And as when the mind of
a man flashes swiftly [in thought], who, having traversed over many a
land, thinks within his prudent heart, "I was here, I was there," and
deliberates much: thus quickly hastening, up sprung venerable Juno. But
she reached lofty Olympus, and came in upon the immortal gods, assembled
in the house of Jove but they beholding her, all rose up and welcomed
her with their cups. The rest, however, she neglected, but received a
goblet from fair-cheeked Themis; for she first running, came to meet
her, and addressing her, spoke winged words:

"Why, O Juno, hast thou come [hither], and art like unto one in
consternation? Has then the son of Saturn, who is thy husband, greatly
terrified thee?"

But her the white-armed goddess Juno then answered: "Do not, O goddess
Themis, ask me these things; even thou thyself knowest how overbearing
and cruel a spirit is his. But do thou preside over the equal feast, in
the palaces of the gods, and thou shalt hear these things along with all
the immortals, what evil deeds Jove denounces. Nor do I at all think
that the mind will equally rejoice to all, neither to mortals nor to the
gods, although some one even yet be feasting pleasantly."

Thus having spoken, venerable Juno sat down; but the gods were grieved
throughout the palace of Jove. But she laughed with her lips [only], nor
was her forehead above her dark brows exhilarated;[485] and, indignant,
she spoke amongst them all:

"Senseless we, who are thus foolishly enraged with father Jove! Of a
truth we still desire to restrain him, approaching near, either by
persuasion or by force; whilst he, sitting apart, does not regard, nor
is moved, for he says he is decidedly the most mighty in strength and
power among the immortal gods. Wherefore endure whatever evil he may
please to send upon each of you; for now already, I think, misfortune
hath been inflicted upon Mars, since his son has perished in the fight,
the dearest of mortals, Ascalaphus, whom impetuous Mars calls his own."

   [Footnote 485: Compare Virg. Æn. i. 211: "Spem vultu simulat,
   premit altum corde dolorem" with Seneca ad Pol. 24. Nemesian.
   Eclog. iv. 17. "Quid vultu mentem premis, ac spem fronte
   serenas." Liv. xxviii. 8: "Mœrebat quidem et angebatur.... in
   concilio tamen dissimulans ægritudinem, elato nimo disseruit."]

Thus she spake; but Mars smote his brawny thighs with his dropped hands,
and sorrowing, addressed them:

"Do not now blame me, ye who possess the Olympic mansions, repairing to
the ships of the Greeks, to avenge the slaughter of my son, even
although it should be my fate, smitten with the thunderbolt of Jove, to
lie together with the dead bodies in blood and dust."

Thus he spake, and he commanded Fear and Flight to yoke his steeds, but
he himself girded on his shining armour. Then indeed some other greater
and more grievous wrath and indignation had fallen upon the immortals
from Jove, had not Minerva, greatly fearing for all the gods, leaped
forth from the vestibule, and left the throne where she sat. From his
head she snatched the helmet, and the shield from his shoulders, and
taking the brazen spear out of his strong hand, she placed it upright;
and rebuked impetuous Mars with [these] words:

"Infuriated one, infatuated in mind, thou art undone! are thy ears
indeed useless for hearing, and have thy sense and shame perished? Dost
thou not hear what the white-armed goddess Juno says, and she has just
now come from Olympian Jove? Dost thou thyself wish, having fulfilled
many misfortunes, to return to Olympus very much grieved, and by
compulsion, and also to create a great evil to all the rest? For he will
immediately leave the Trojans and magnanimous Greeks, and will come
against us, about to disturb us in Olympus; and will seize us one after
the other, whoever is culpable and who is not. Wherefore I exhort thee
now to lay aside thy wrath on account of thy son, for already some one,
even superior to him in strength and in hands, either is slain, or will
be hereafter; for it would be a difficult task to liberate [from death]
the race and offspring of all men."

So saying, she seated impetuous Mars upon his throne. But Juno called
Apollo outside the house, and Iris, who is the messenger among the
immortal gods, and addressing them, spoke winged words:

"Jove orders you twain to repair with all haste to Ida, but when ye
arrive, and look upon the countenance of Jove, do whatsoever he may urge
and command."

Then indeed, having thus spoken, venerable Juno retired, and sat down
upon her throne; but they, hastening, flew and arrived at Ida of many
rills, the mother of wild beasts. They found the far-seeing son of
Saturn sitting upon lofty Gargarus, and an odoriferous cloud encircled
him around. But coming before cloud-compelling Jove, they stood; nor was
he enraged in his mind, beholding them, because they quickly obeyed the
commands of his dear wife. And first to Iris he addressed winged words:

"Haste, begone, fleet Iris, tell all these things to king Neptune, nor
be thou a false messenger. Order him, having ceased from the battle and
the war, to repair to the assemblies of the gods, or to the vast sea.
If, however, he will not obey my words, but shall despise them, let him
then consider in his mind and soul, lest, however powerful he may be, he
may not be able to withstand me coming against him; for I say that I am
superior to him in strength, and elder in birth; but his heart fears
riot to assert himself equal to me, whom even the others dread."

Thus he spoke, nor was wind-footed, swift Iris disobedient: but she
descended from the Idæan mountains to sacred Ilium. And as when snow
drifts from the clouds, or cold hail, by the impulse of
cloud-dispelling[486] Boreas, so quickly swift Iris with eagerness flew
along, and standing near illustrious Neptune, she addressed him:

"O azure-haired Earth-shaker, I have come hither, bringing a certain
message to thee from ægis-bearing Jove. He has commanded thee, having
ceased from the battle and the war, to repair either to the assemblies
of the gods or to the vast sea. But if thou wilt not obey his words, but
shalt despise them, he threatens that he will come hither himself to
fight against thee; and advises thee to avoid his hands, because he
asserts that he is greatly superior to thee in strength, and elder in
birth: but thy heart does not fear to profess that thou art equal to
him, whom even the others dread."

But her illustrious Neptune, greatly indignant, then addressed: "Gods!
powerful though he be, he surely has spoken proudly, if he will by force
restrain me unwilling, who am of equal honour. For we are three brothers
[descended] from Saturn, whom Rhea brought forth: Jupiter and I, and
Pluto, governing the infernal regions, the third; all things were
divided into three parts, and each was allotted his dignity.[487] I in
the first place, the lots being shaken, was allotted to inhabit for ever
the hoary sea, and Pluto next obtained the pitchy darkness; but Jove in
the third place had allotted to him the wide heaven in the air and in
the clouds. Nevertheless the earth is still the common property of all,
and lofty Olympus. Wherefore I shall not live according to the will of
Jove, but although being very powerful, let him remain quiet in his
third part; and let him by no means terrify me as a coward with his
hands. For it would be better for him to insult with terrific language
the daughters and sons whom he hath begotten, who will also through
necessity attend to him, exhorting them."

But him the fleet wind-footed Iris then answered: "O[488] azure-haired
Earth-shaker, shall I really thus bear back from thee to Jove this
relentless and violent reply? Or wilt thou change it at all? The minds
of the prudent indeed are flexible. Thou knowest that the Furies are
ever attendant on the elders." [489]

   [Footnote 486: More literalty, "producing clear air." So
   Eustathius, or Eumathius, Erotic. ii. p. 14: Αἰθρηγενέτης Βοῤῥάς.
   Heyne prefers "in aere genitus."]

   [Footnote 487: On this division of things, see Servius on Virg.
   Æn. i. 143; Fulgent Myth. i. 1, 3. The Scholiasts attempt to
   refer it to the ancient theory of the elements.]

   [Footnote 488: These three verses were elegantly applied by
   Sostrates in mitigating the intemperate language which Antigonus
   would fain have addressed to Ptolemy Philadelphus. See Sextus
   Emp. adv. Gramm. i. 13, p. 276.]

   [Footnote 489: The Furies are said to wait on men in a double
   sense; either for evil, as upon Orestes after he had slain his
   mother; or else for good, as upon elders when they are injured,
   to protect them and avenge their wrongs. This is an instance that
   the pagans looked upon birthright as a right divine. Eustath.
   quoted in ed. Dubl. cf. ix. 507.]

But her again earth-shaking Neptune in turn addressed: "Goddess Iris,
very rightly hast thou delivered this opinion; moreover, it is good when
a messenger knows fitting things. But on this account severe indignation
comes upon my heart and soul, because he wishes to chide with angry
words me, equal to him by lot, and doomed to an equal destiny.
Nevertheless, at present, although being indignant, I will give way. But
another thing will I tell thee, and I will threaten this from my soul;
if indeed, without me and prey-hunting Minerva, Juno, Mercury, and king
Vulcan, he shall spare lofty Ilium, nor shall wish to destroy it, and
give great glory to the Greeks; let him know this, that endless
animosity shall arise between us."

So saying, the Earth-shaker quitted the Grecian army, and proceeding, he
plunged into the deep; but the Grecian heroes longed for him. And then
cloud-compelling Jove addressed Apollo:

"Go now, dear Phœbus, to brazen-helmed Hector; for already hath
earth-encircling Neptune departed to the vast sea, avoiding our dreadful
anger; for otherwise the rest, who are infernal gods, being around
Saturn, would surely have heard our quarrel. This, however, is much
better for me as well as for himself, that he hath first yielded to my
hands, accounting himself worthy of blame, because the matter would not
have been accomplished without sweat. But do thou take the fringed ægis
in thy hands, with which, by violently shaking it, do thou greatly
terrify the Grecian heroes. To thyself, however, O far-darting [Apollo],
let illustrious Hector be a care. So long then arouse his great might
unto him, until the Greeks in flight reach the ships and the Hellespont.
Thenceforth I shall myself deliberate in deed and word, how the Greeks
also may revive from labour."

Thus he spoke, nor did Apollo disobey his sire, but he descended from
the Idæan mountains like unto a swift hawk the dove-destroyer, the
swiftest of birds. He found the son of warlike Priam, noble Hector,
sitting; for he no longer lay [on the ground], but had just collected
his senses, recognizing his friends around him. But the panting and
perspiration had ceased, since the will of ægis-bearing Jove had aroused
him. Then far-darting Apollo, standing near, addressed him:

"Hector, son of Priam, why sittest thou apart from the rest, failing in
strength? Has any grief invaded thee?"

But him then crest-tossing Hector languidly addressed: "And who art
thou, best of the gods, who inquirest face to face? Hast thou not heard
that Ajax, brave in the din of battle, smote me with a stone upon the
breast, and caused me to cease from impetuous valour, when slaying his
companions at the sterns of the Grecian ships? And truly I thought that
I should this day behold the dead, and the mansion of Pluto, since I was
[on the point of] breathing out my dear life."

But him far-darting king Apollo addressed in turn: "Be of good courage
now, so great an assistant has the son of Saturn sent forth from Ida to
stand up and help thee, Phœbus Apollo, of the golden sword: who am
accustomed to defend at the same time thyself and the lofty city. But
come, encourage now thy numerous cavalry to drive their fleet steeds
towards the hollow ships; but I, going before, will level the whole way
for the horses, and I will turn to flight the Grecian heroes."

Thus speaking, he inspired great strength into the shepherd of the
people. As when some stalled horse, fed on barley[490] at the manger,
having snapped his halter, runs over the plain, striking the earth with
his feet (accustomed to bathe in the smooth-flowing river), exulting, he
holds his head on high, and around his shoulders his mane is
dishevelled; and, trusting to his beauty[491]--his knees easily bear him
to the accustomed places and pasture of the mares: so Hector swiftly
moved his feet and knees, encouraging the horsemen, after he had heard
the voice of the god. But they--as dogs and rustic men rush against
either a horned stag or wild goat; which however a lofty rock and shady
forest protect, nor is it destined for them to catch it; but at their
clamour[492] a bushy-bearded lion appears in the way, and turns them all
back, although ardently pursuing: thus the Greeks hitherto indeed ever
kept following in troops, striking with their swords and double-edged
spears. But when they beheld Hector entering the ranks of heroes, they
were troubled, and the courage of all fell at their feet.

   [Footnote 490: Cf. vi. 508; and on άκοστήσας, Buttm. Lexil. p.
   75, sq.]

   [Footnote 491: Observe the abrupt change of construction.]

   [Footnote 492: Ὕπὸ ἰαχῆς, attracted by their shouting.]

Then Thoas, the son of Andræmon, addressed them, by far the bravest of
the Ætolians, skilled in the use of the javelin, and brave in the
standing fight; few also of the Greeks excelled him in the council when
the youths contended in eloquence. Who wisely counselling, harangued
them, and said:

"O gods, surely I behold with mine eyes this mighty miracle, since
Hector has thus risen again, having escaped death. Certainly the mind of
each was in great hopes that he had died by the hands of Telamonian
Ajax. But some one of the gods has again liberated and preserved Hector,
who hath already relaxed the knees of many Greeks; as I think is about
[to occur] now also, for not without far-sounding Jove does he stand in
the van, thus earnest. But come, let us all obey as I shall desire. Let
us order the multitude to retreat towards the ships. But let us, as many
as boast ourselves to be the best in the army, take a stand, if indeed,
opposing, we may at the outset interrupt him, upraising our spears; and
I think that he, although raging, will dread in mind to enter the band
of the Greeks."

Thus he spoke; but all heard him attentively, and obeyed. Those around
the Ajaces and king Idomeneus, Teucer, Meriones, and Meges, equal to
Mars, calling the chiefs together, marshalled their lines against Hector
and the Trojans; whilst the multitude in the rear retreated to the ships
of the Greeks. But the Trojans in close array pressed forward; and
Hector, taking long strides, led the way; but before him walked Phœbus
Apollo, clad as to his shoulders with a cloud,[493] and he held the
mighty, dreadful, fringed,[494] dazzling ægis, which the artist Vulcan
had given to Jove, to be borne along for the routing of men. Holding
this in his hands, he led on the people. But the Greeks remained in
close array, and a shrill shout arose on both sides. [Many] arrows
bounded from the strings, and many spears from gallant hands: some were
fixed in the bodies of warlike youths, but many half way, before they
had touched the fair body, stuck in the earth, longing to satiate
themselves with flesh. As long as Phœbus Apollo held the ægis unmoved in
his hands, so long did the weapons reach both sides, and the people
fell. But when, looking full in the faces of the swift-horsed Greeks, he
shook it, and he himself besides shouted very loudly, then he checked
the courage in their breasts, and they became forgetful of impetuous
valour. But they, as when two wild beasts, in the depth of the dark
night,[495] disturb a drove of oxen or a great flock of sheep, coming
suddenly upon them, the keeper not being present--so the enfeebled
Greeks were routed; for amongst them Apollo sent terror, and gave glory
to the Trojans and to Hector. Then indeed man slew man, when the battle
gave way. Hector slew Stichius and Arcesilaus; the one the leader of the
brazen-mailed Bœotians; but the other the faithful companion of
magnanimous Menestheus. But Æneas slew Medon and Iasus: Medon indeed was
the illegitimate son of godlike Oïleus, and brother of Ajax; and he
dwelt in Phylace, away from his father-land, having slain a man, the
brother of his stepmother Eriopis, whom Oïleus had betrothed. Iasus,
however, was appointed leader of the Athenians, and was called the son
of Sphelus, the son of Bucolus. But Polydamas slew Mecistis, and Polites
Echius, in the van, and noble Agenor slew Klonius. Paris also wounded
Dëiochous in the extremity of the shoulder from behind, whilst he was
flying amongst the foremost combatants; and drove the brass quite
through.

   [Footnote 493: "Nube candentes humeros amictus, Augur
   Apollo."--Hor. Od. 2, 31.]

   [Footnote 494: Cf. ii. 448. Literally, "shaggy, rugged, with
   fringes around."]

   [Footnote 495: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 89, whose translation of
   νυκτὸς ἀμολγῷ I have followed.]

Whilst they were spoiling these of their armour, the Greeks in the
meantime falling into the dug trench and stakes, fled here and there;
and from necessity entered within the rampart. But Hector, shouting
aloud, exhorted the Trojans to rush upon the ships, and to let go the
bloody spoils: "And whatever person I[496] shall perceive apart from the
ships anywhere, there will I cause his death; nor indeed shall his male
and female relatives make him when dead partaker of a funeral pile, but
dogs shall tear him before our city."

   [Footnote 496: Observe this sudden and animated change of person,
   which has been noticed by Longinus, xxvii. and Dionys. Halic. de
   Hom. Poes. § 8. This irregularity is very common in the Greek
   Testament. Cf. Luke v. 14; Acts i. 4; xvii. 3; xxiii. 22; xxv. 8;
   with the notes of Kuinoel and Pricæus.]

So saying, with the lash upon the shoulder he drove on his horses
against the ranks, cheering on the Trojans; but they all shouting along
with him, directed their car-drawing steeds with a mighty clamour. But
Phœbus Apollo in front of them, easily overthrowing the banks of the
deep ditch with his feet, cast [them] into the middle; and bridged a
causeway long and wide, as far as the cast of a spear reaches, when a
man, making trial of his strength, hurls it. In that way they poured
onward by troops, and Apollo [went] before them, holding the
highly-prized ægis. But he overthrew the wall of the Greeks very easily,
as when any boy does the sand from the shore; who, when amusing himself
in childishness he has made playthings, again destroys them with his
feet and hands. Thus, O archer Phœbus, didst thou destroy the great
labour and toil of the Greeks, and didst excite flight amongst
themselves. In this manner indeed, remaining, they were penned up at the
ships; animating each other, and raising up their hands to all the gods,
they each loudly offered vows. But the guardian of the Greeks, Gerenian
Nestor, most particularly prayed, stretching forth his hands to the
starry heaven: "O father Jove, if ever any one in fruitful Argos, to
thee burning the fat thighs of either oxen or sheep, supplicated that he
might return, and thou didst promise and assent; be mindful of these
things, O Olympian, and avert the cruel day; nor thus permit the Greeks
to be subdued by the Trojans."

Thus he spoke, praying: but provident Jove loudly thundered, hearing the
prayers of the Neleïan old man. But the Trojans, when they understood
the will of ægis-bearing Jove, rushed the more against the Greeks, and
were mindful of battle. And as a mighty wave of the wide-flowing ocean
dashes over the sides of a ship, when the force of the wind impels it
(for that most of all increases waves); so the Trojans with a mighty
shout mounted over the wall. And having driven in their horses, they
fought at the sterns, hand to hand with two-edged spears, the one party
from their chariots, but the other on high from their black ships,
having ascended them with long poles which lay in their vessels, for
fighting by sea, well glued, and clad on the tip with brass.

But Patroclus, as long indeed as the Greeks and Trojans fought round
the wall, without the swift ships, so long he sat in the tent of
valour-loving Eurypylus, and delighted him with his discourse; and to
the severe wound he applied medicines, assuagers of dark pains. But when
he perceived that the Trojans had burst within the walls, and moreover
that a clamour and flight of the Greeks had arisen, then indeed he
groaned, and smote both his thighs with his downward-bent hands; and
lamenting spoke:

"O Eurypylus, I cannot any longer remain here with thee, although
needing much, for now has a mighty contest arisen. But let thy attendant
entertain thee, and I will hasten to Achilles, that I may encourage him
to fight. And who knows whether, with God's assistance, persuading, I
may move his soul? for the admonition of a companion is effectual." But
him his feet then bore away thus speaking. Meanwhile the Greeks firmly
withstood the Trojans rushing on, nor were they able to repel them from
the ships, although being fewer; nor could the Trojans, breaking through
the phalanxes of the Greeks, be mingled with the tents or ships. But as
a plumb-line in the hands of a skilful shipwright (who knows well the
whole art by the precepts of Minerva) correctly adjusts the naval plank,
so was the battle and war equally extended. Some indeed supported the
conflict round one ship, and others round another, but Hector advanced
against glorious Ajax. Thus these two undertook the task round one ship,
nor were they able, the one to drive the other away and burn the ship
with fire, nor the other to repulse him, since a divinity had brought
him near. Then illustrious Ajax smote upon the breast with his spear
Caletor, son of Clytius, bearing fire against the ship; and falling, he
resounded, and the torch fell from his hand. But when Hector perceived
with his eyes his cousin fallen in the dust before the black ship, he
cheered on the Trojans and Lycians, loudly exclaiming:

"Ye Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, do not now
retire from the fight in this narrow pass. But preserve the son of
Clytius, lest the Greeks despoil him of his armour, having fallen in the
contest at the ships." Thus having spoken, he took aim with his shining
spear at Ajax, whom he missed; but [he smote] Lycophron, the son of
Mastor, the servant of Ajax, a Cytherean, who dwelt with him, since he
had killed a man amongst the celebrated Cythereans. He struck him on the
head over the ear, with the sharp brass, whilst he was standing near
Ajax: but he fell supine to the ground from the stern of the ship in the
dust, and his limbs were relaxed. Then Ajax shuddered, and accosted his
brother: "Dear Teucer, now is our faithful companion, the son of Mastor,
whom being domesticated in Cythera, we honoured equally with our beloved
parents in our palaces; but him magnanimous Hector has slain. Where now
are thy death-bearing arrows and bow, which Phœbus Apollo gave thee?"

Thus he spoke; but he understood; and running, he stood near him,
holding in his hand his bent bow, and arrow-bearing quiver; and very
quickly he shot his arrows amongst the Trojans. He struck Clitus, the
illustrious son of Pisenor, the companion of Polydamas, the renowned son
of Panthous, holding the reins in his hands. He indeed was employed in
[guiding] the horses; for he directed them there, where the most
numerous phalanxes were thrown in confusion, gratifying Hector and the
Trojans. But soon came evil upon him, which no one averted from him,
although eager; for the bitter shaft fell upon his neck from behind, and
he fell from the chariot, whilst his horses started back, rattling the
empty car. But king Polydamas very quickly perceived it, and first came
to meet his horses. Them he intrusted to Astynous, son of Protiaon, and
exhorted him much to keep the horses near him within sight; but he
himself returning was mingled with the foremost combatants. Teucer,
however, drew another arrow against brazen-armed Hector, and would have
made him cease from battle, at the ships of the Greeks, if striking him
while bravely fighting, he had taken away his life. But it did not
escape the prudent mind of Jove, who protected Hector, and deprived
Teucer, the son of Telamon, of glory; and who (Jove) broke the
well-twisted string, in his blameless bow, as he was drawing against
[Hector]; but the brass-laden arrow was turned off in another direction,
and the bow fell from his hand. Then Teucer shuddered, and addressed his
brother:

"Ye gods! a deity, without doubt, cuts short the plans of our battle,
who has shaken the bow from my hand, and has snapped asunder the
newly-twisted string which I tied to it this morning, that it might
sustain the shafts frequently bounding from it."

But him the mighty Telamonian Ajax then answered: "O my friend, permit
then thy bow and numerous arrows to lie aside, since a god has
confounded them, envying the Greeks; but, taking a long spear in thy
hands, and a shield upon thy shoulder, fight against the Trojans, and
encourage the other forces. Nor let them take the well-benched ships
without labour at least, although having subdued us, but let us be
mindful of the fight."

Thus he spoke; and he placed his bow within the tents. Then around his
shoulders he hung a four-fold shield, and upon his brave head fixed a
well-made helmet, crested with horse-hair, and the plume nodded
dreadfully from above. And he grasped a stout spear, tipped with sharp
brass, and hastened to advance, and running very quickly, stood beside
Ajax. But when Hector perceived the arrows of Teucer frustrated, he
encouraged the Trojans and Lycians, calling aloud:

"Ye Trojans, Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my friends,
and be mindful of impetuous valour at the hollow ships; for I have
beheld with my eyes the arrows of their chief warrior rendered vain by
Jove. Easily recognizable amongst men is the power of Jove, as well
among those into whose hands he has delivered superior glory, as those
whom he deteriorates, and does not wish to defend. As now he diminishes
the might of the Greeks, and aids us. But fight in close array at the
ships, and whichever of you, wounded or stricken, shall draw on his
death and fate, let him die; it is not inglorious to him to die fighting
for his country; but his wife shall be safe, and his children left
behind him, his house and patrimony unimpaired, if indeed the Greeks
depart with their ships to their dear father-land."

So saying, he kindled the strength and spirit of each: and Ajax again,
on the other side, animated his companions:

"Shame, oh Argives! now is the moment for us either to perish, or to be
preserved and to repel destruction from the ships. Do ye expect that if
crest-tossing Hector capture the ships, ye will reach on foot each his
native land? Do ye not hear Hector, who now rages to fire the ships,
inciting all his people? Nor indeed does he invite them to come to a
dance, but to battle. But for us there is no opinion or design better
than this, to join in close fight our hands and strength. Better, either
to perish at once, or live, rather than thus uselessly to be wasted
away[497] for a length of time in dire contention at the ships, by
inferior men."

   [Footnote 497: The verb στρεύγεσθαι, which may be compared with
   ἀπολιβάζειν in Od. xii. 351, is interpreted by Apollonius
   καταπονεῖσθαι. Cf. Hesych. t. i. p. 1603, t. ii. p. 1278.]

So saying, he aroused the strength and courage of each. Then Hector
indeed slew Schedius, son of Perimedes, prince of the Phoceans; and Ajax
slew Laodamas, leader of the infantry, the illustrious son of Antenor.
Polydamas slew Cyllenian Otus, the companion of the son of Phyleus,
chief of the magnanimous Epeans. Meges rushed upon him, perceiving it,
but Polydamas stooped obliquely, and he missed him; for Apollo did not
suffer the son of Panthous to be subdued among the foremost warriors.
But he wounded Crœsmus in the middle of the breast with his spear, but
falling, he resounded; and he stripped the arms from his shoulders. In
the meantime Dolops, the descendant of Lampus, well skilled in the
spear, leaped upon him (he whom Lampus, son of Laomedon, the best of
men, begat, skilled in impetuous fight), who then attacking him in close
fight, struck the middle of Meges's shield with his spear: but the thick
corslet defended him, which he wore, compact in its cavities. This
Phyleus formerly brought from Ephyre, from the river Selleïs: for his
host, Euphetes, king of men, had given it to him, to bear into the
battle as a defence against the enemy; and which then warded off
destruction from the body of his son. But Meges with his sharp spear
smote the base of the highest cone of his brazen horse-haired helmet,
and struck off his horse-haired crest; and the whole fell on the ground
in the dust, lately shining with purple. Whilst the one (Meges) standing
firm, fought with the other (Dolops), and still expected victory;
meanwhile, warlike Menelaus came as an assistant to him (Meges), and
stood at his side with his spear, escaping notice, and wounded him from
behind in the shoulder; but the spear, driven with violence, passed
through his breast, proceeding farther; and he fell on his face. Both
then rushed on, about to tear the brazen armour from his shoulders; but
Hector strenuously exhorted all his relations, and rebuked the gallant
Melanippus first, the son of Hicetaon. He till then had fed his
curved-footed oxen at Percote, the enemy being yet at a distance; but
when the equally-plied barks of the Greeks had arrived, he came back to
Troy, and was distinguished amongst the Trojans; and he dwelt near
Priam, and he honoured him equally with his sons. But Hector rebuked
him; and spoke and addressed him:

"Shall we be thus remiss, O Melanippus? Is not thy heart moved, thy
kinsman being slain? Dost thou not perceive how busy they are about the
arms of Dolops? But follow; for it is no longer justifiable to fight at
a distance with the Greeks, before that either we slay them, or that
they tear lofty Ilium from its summit, and slay its citizens." So
saying, he led on, and the godlike hero followed with him. But mighty
Telamonian Ajax aroused the Greeks.

"O my friends, be men, and set honour[498] in your hearts, and have
reverence for each other during the vehement conflicts. For more of
those men who reverence [each other] are saved than slain; but of the
fugitives, neither glory arises, nor any defence."

   [Footnote 498: Cf. v. 530, xiii. 121, with the notes.]

Thus he spoke, but they too were eager to repel [the enemy]. And they
fixed his advice in their mind, and enclosed the ships with a brazen
fence; but Jove urged on the Trojans. And Menelaus, brave in the din of
battle, incited Antilochus:

"O Antilochus, no other of the Greeks is younger than thou, nor swifter
of foot, nor strong, as thou [art], to fight. Would[499] that, attacking
some hero of the Trojans, thou couldst wound him."

   [Footnote 499: Εἰ is put for εἴθε.]

So saying, he on his part withdrew again, and he aroused him. But he
(Antilochus) leaped forth from amongst the foremost warriors, and took
aim with his shining spear, gazing around him; but the Trojans retired,
the hero hurling. But he did not cast his weapon in vain, for he struck
magnanimous Melanippus, the son of Hicetaon, in the breast, near the
pap, advancing to the battle. And falling, he made a crash, and his arms
rang upon him. But Antilochus sprang upon him, as a dog that rushes on a
wounded fawn, which the huntsman aiming at, has wounded, leaping from
its lair, and relaxed its limbs under it. Thus, O Melanippus, did
warlike Antilochus spring on thee, about to despoil thee of thy armour:
but he did not escape noble Hector, who came against him, running
through the battle. But Antilochus did not await him, though being an
expert warrior, but he fled, like unto a wild beast that has done some
mischief, which, having slain a dog or herdsman in charge of oxen,
flies, before a crowd of men is assembled: so fled the son of Nestor;
but the Trojans and Hector, with great clamour, poured forth their
deadly weapons. Yet when he reached the band of his own companions,
being turned round, he stood. But the Trojans, like raw-devouring lions,
rushed upon the ships, and were fulfilling the commands of Jove; who
ever kept exciting their great strength, and enervated the courage of
the Greeks, and took away their glory; but encouraged those. For his
mind wished to bestow glory on Hector, the son of Priam, that he might
cast the dreadfully-burning, indefatigable fire upon the crooked barks;
and accomplish all the unseasonable prayer of Thetis.

For this did provident Jove await, till he should behold with his eyes
the flame of a burning vessel; for from that time he was about to make a
retreat of the Trojans from the ships, and to afford glory to the
Greeks. Designing these things, he aroused Hector, the son of Priam,
against the hollow ships, although himself very eager. But he raged, as
when Mars [rages], brandishing his spear, or [when] a destructive fire
rages in the mountains, in the thickets of a deep wood. And foam arose
about his mouth, and his eyes flashed from beneath his grim eyebrows;
and the helm was shaken awfully upon the temples of Hector, fighting;
for Jove himself from the æther was an assistant to him, and honoured
and glorified him alone amongst many men; because he was destined to be
short-lived: for Pallas Minerva already impelled him towards the fatal
day, by the might of the son of Peleus. And he wished to break the ranks
of heroes, trying them, wheresoever he beheld the greatest crowd and the
best arms. But not thus was he able to break through them, although very
eager; for they, compact in squares, sustained his attack, as a lofty,
huge cliff, being near the hoary deep, which abides the impetuous
inroads of the shrill winds, and the swollen billows which are dashed
against it. Thus the Greeks firmly awaited the Trojans, nor fled. But
he, gleaming with fire on all sides, rushed upon the crowd; and fell
upon them, as when an impetuous wave, wind-nurtured from the clouds,
dashes against a swift ship, and it [the ship] is wholly enveloped with
the spray, and a dreadful blast of wind roars within the sail: but the
sailors tremble in mind, fearing, because they are borne but a little
way from death: thus was the mind of the Greeks divided in their
breasts. He, however, like a destructive lion coming upon oxen which
feed in myriads in the moist ground of a spacious marsh, and amongst
them a keeper not very skilful in fighting with a wild beast for the
slaughter of a crooked-horned ox;[500] he indeed always accompanies the
foremost or the hindmost cattle, whilst [the lion] springing into the
midst, devours an ox, and all the rest fly in terror; thus then were the
Greeks wondrously put to flight by Hector and father Jove, all--but
[Hector] slew only Mycenæan Periphetes, the dear son of Copreus, who
went with a messenger of king Eurystheus to mighty Hercules. From this
far inferior father sprung a son superior in all kinds of
accomplishments, as well in the race as in the combat, and who in
prudence was among the first of the Mycenæans, who at that time gave
into the hands of Hector superior glory. For, turning backwards, he trod
upon the rim of his shield which he bore, a fence against javelins,
which reached to his feet; by this incommoded, he fell upon his back,
and the helmet terribly sounded round the temples of him fallen. But
Hector quickly perceived, and running, stood near him, and fixed his
spear in his breast, and slew him near his beloved companions, nor
indeed were they able, although grieved for their comrade, to avail him,
for they themselves greatly feared noble Hector. But they retreated
within the line of their ships,[501] and the extreme ships enclosed
them, which were first drawn up: and the others were poured in. The
Argives, therefore, from necessity, retreated from the foremost vessels,
and remained there at their tents in close array, and were not dispersed
through the camp, for shame and fear restrained them, and they
unceasingly exhorted one another with shouting. More particularly did
Gerenian Nestor, the guardian of the Greeks, adjure them by their
parents, earnestly supplicating each man:

"O my friends, be men, and place a sense of reverence[502] of other men
in your minds. Call to memory, each of you, your children, wives,
property, and parents, as well he to whom they survive as he to whom
they are dead; for by those not present I here supplicate you to stand
bravely, nor be ye turned to flight." So saying, he aroused the might
and spirit of each. But for them Minerva removed the heaven-sent cloud
of darkness from their eyes; and abundant light arose to them on both
sides, both towards the ships and towards the equally destructive
battle. Then they observed Hector, brave in the din of battle, and his
companions, as well whatever of them stood behind and did not fight as
those who fought the battle at the swift ships. Nor was it longer
pleasing to the mind of great-hearted Ajax to stand there where the
other sons of the Greeks stood together; but he went about upon the
decks of the vessels, taking long strides, and wielding in his hands a
great sea-fighting pole, studded with iron nails, twenty-two cubits
long. And as when a man well skilled in vaulting upon steeds, who, after
he has selected four horses out of a greater number, driving them from
the plain, urges them towards a mighty city, along the public way; and
him many men and women behold with admiration; but he, always leaping up
firmly and safely, changes alternately from one to the other,[503]
whilst they are flying along: so went Ajax along many decks of swift
ships, shouting loudly, and his voice reached to the sky; and, always
terribly shouting, he ordered the Greeks to defend their ships and
tents. Nor, indeed, did Hector remain among the crowd of well-corsleted
Trojans; but as the tawny eagle pounces upon a flock of winged birds,
feeding on a river's bank, either geese or cranes, or long-necked swans,
so did Hector direct his course towards an azure-prowed vessel, rushing
against it; but Jove, with a very mighty hand, impelled him from behind,
and animated his forces along with him. Again was a sharp contest waged
at the ships. You would have said that unwearied and indefatigable they
met each other in battle, so furiously they fought. And to them fighting
this was the opinion: the Greeks, indeed, thought that they could not
escape from destruction, but must perish. But the soul of each within
his breast, to the Trojans, hoped to burn the ships, and slay the
Grecian heroes. They thinking these things, opposed one another.

   [Footnote 500: _I.e._ about its carcase. The Scholiast also gives
   another interpretation, viz. "to prevent his killing an ox;" but
   Kennedy, with reason, prefers the former one.]

   [Footnote 501: "_They now held their ships in view_, which were
   arranged in a two-fold line, from the outermost whereof the
   Greeks were driven in upon their tents, disposed in the
   intermediate position between the lines of the
   vessels."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 502: Cf. v. 530.]

   [Footnote 503: As the "desultores" (Liv. xxiii. 29). Hence
   "desultor amoris," in Ovid, Amor. i. 3, 15, to denote an
   inconstant lover; "desultoria scientia," Apuleius, Met. i. præf.,
   speaking of his own varied fable.]

But Hector seized the stern of a sea-traversing bark, beautiful, swift,
which had carried Protesilaus[504] to Troy, but did not bear him back
again to his father-land. Round his ship the Greeks and Trojans were now
slaying one another in close combat; nor did they indeed at a distance
await the attacks of arrows and of javelins, but standing near, having
one mind, they fought with sharp battle-axes and hatchets, with large
swords and two-edged spears. And many fair swords, black-hilted, with
massive handles, fell to the ground, some indeed from the hands, and
others from the shoulders of the contending heroes; and the dark earth
streamed with gore. But Hector, after he had seized [the vessel] by the
stern, did not let go, holding the furthest[505] edge with his hands,
and he cheered on the Trojans:

"Bring fire, and at the same time do yourselves together excite the
battle. Now hath Jove vouchsafed us a day worth all,[506] to take the
ships, which, coming hither against the will of the gods, brought many
evils upon us through the cowardice of our elders, who kept me back when
desirous myself to fight at the sterns of the ships, and restrained the
people. But if, indeed, far-sounding Jove then injured[507] our minds,
he now impels and orders us." Thus he spoke, but they rushed the more
against the Greeks. Even Ajax no longer sustained them, for he was
overwhelmed with darts; but, thinking he should fall, retired back a
short space to the seven-feet bench, and deserted the deck of his equal
ship. There he stood watching, and with his spear continually repulsed
the Trojans from the ships, whoever might bring the indefatigable fire;
and always shouting dreadfully, he animated the Greeks:

"O my friends, Grecian heroes, servants of Mars, be men, my friends, and
be mindful of impetuous strength. Whether do we think that we have any
assistants in the rear, or any stronger rampart which may avert
destruction from the men? Indeed there is not any other city near,
fortified with towers, where we may be defended, having a reinforcing
army; but bordering on the sea, we sit in the plain of the well-armed
Trojans, far away from our native land; therefore safety is in our
exertions, not in remission of battle."

He said, and furious, charged with his sharp spear whoever of the
Trojans was borne towards the hollow ships with burning fire, for the
sake of Hector who incited them;--him Ajax wounded, receiving him with
his long spear; and he slew twelve in close fight before the ships.

   [Footnote 504: The reader will do well to read the beautiful
   sketch of this hero's deification after death in Philostratus's
   preface to the Heroica. He was the first of the Greeks who fell,
   being slain by Hector as he leaped from the vessel (Hygin. Fab.
   ciii.; Auson. Epigr. xx.). He was buried on the Chersonese, near
   the city Plagusa. Hygin. P.A. ii. 40.]

   [Footnote 505: The Oxford translator renders ἄφλαστον "the
   tafferel."]

   [Footnote 506: This is, I think, much more spirited than the
   Scholiast's πάντων πόνων ἰσόῤῥοπον, or πάντων τῶν τολμηθέντων.
   Supply, therefore, ήμάτων.]

   [Footnote 507: _I.e._ befooled our senses, taking away our proper
   spirit. So Theognισ has υοοῖ βεβλαμμένος ἐσθλοῦ.]




                         BOOK THE SIXTEENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Patroclus at length obtains permission from Achilles, and enters the
fight, on condition that he should return after liberating the Greeks
from their immediate peril. He comes opportunely to the assistance of
Ajax, routs the Trojans, and kills Sarpedon, whose body, but without the
armour, is rescued by Hector and Glaucus. Forgetful of his promise to
Achilles, Patroclus pursues the Trojans to their very walls. He is
driven back by Apollo, but slays the charioteer of Hector, Cebriones. He
is suddenly afflicted with stupor by Apollo, and dies by the hand of
Hector, whose death he foretells. Hector pursues Automedon with the
chariot of Achilles towards the ships.


Thus, then, they were fighting for the well-benched ship. But Patroclus
stood beside Achilles, the shepherd of the people, shedding warm[508]
tears; as a black-water fountain, which pours its sable tide down from a
lofty rock. But swift-footed noble Achilles, seeing, pitied him, and
addressing him, spoke winged words:

"Why weepest thou, O Patroclus, as an infant girl, who, running along
with her mother, importunes to be taken up, catching her by the robe,
and detains her hastening; and weeping, looks at her [mother] till she
is taken up?--like unto her, O Patroclus, dost thou shed the tender
tear. Dost thou bear any tidings to the Myrmidons, or to me myself? Or
hast thou alone heard any news from Phthia? They say that, indeed,
Menœtius, the son of Actor, still lives, and that Peleus, the son of
Æacus, lives amongst the Myrmidons: for deeply should we lament for
either of them dying. Or dost thou mourn for the Greeks, because they
thus perish at their hollow ships, on account of their injustice? Speak
out, nor conceal it in thy mind, that we both may know."

   [Footnote 508: Longus, iv. 7: Δάκρυα ἦν ἐπὶ τούτοις θερμότερα,
   which Mollus, referring to Homer, thus explains: "Lacrymæ, quæ ex
   magno impetu, et animi affectu quasi calido, neutiquam simulatæ
   prosiliebant."]

But deeply sighing, O knight Patroclus, him thou didst address: "O
Achilles, son of Peleus, by far the bravest of the Greeks, be not
indignant; since a grief so heavy does oppress the Greeks: for now all
they, as many as were formerly most valiant, lie in the ships, wounded
or stricken. Brave Diomede, indeed, the son of Tydeus, is wounded, and
spear-renowned Ulysses is stricken, as also Agamemnon; and Eurypylus is
also wounded in the thigh with an arrow. About these, indeed, physicians
skilled in many remedies are employed healing their wounds: but thou, O
Achilles, art inexorable. Never may such anger seize me at least, as
thee, O cruelly brave, dost preserve. What other after-born man will be
defended by thee, if thou will not avert unworthy ruin from the Greeks?
merciless one! Certainly the knight Peleus was not thy father, nor
Thetis thy mother; but the grey[509] Ocean produced thee, and the lofty
rocks; for thy mind is cruel. But if thou wouldst avoid any oracle in
thy mind, and thy venerable mother has told any to thee from Jove, at
least send me quickly, and at the same time give me the rest of the army
of the Myrmidons, if perchance I may become any aid to the Greeks. Grant
me also to be armed on my shoulders with thy armour, if perchance the
Trojans, likening me to thee, may cease from battle, and the warlike
sons of the Greeks, now fatigued, breathe again; and there be a short
respite from war.[510] But we [who are] fresh, can easily repulse men
worn out with battle from our ships and tents towards the city."

   [Footnote 509: Alluding to the colour of the ocean when ruffled
   by a storm. With the following passage compare Theocrit. iii. 15,
   sqq.; Eurip. Bacch. 971, sqq.; Virg. Æn. iv. 365, sqq.; Eψl.
   viii. 43, sqq., with Macrob. Sat. v. 11.]

   [Footnote 510: Cf. xi. 800, with the note.]

Thus he spoke, supplicating, very rash; for, assuredly, he was about to
supplicate for himself evil death and fate. Whom, deeply sighing,
swift-footed Achilles addressed:

"Alas! most noble Patroclus, what hast thou said? I neither regard any
oracle which I have heard, nor has my venerable mother told anything to
me from Jove. But this bitter grief comes upon my heart and soul, when a
man who excels in power, wishes to deprive his equal[511] of his
portion, and to take back his reward because he excels in power."

   [Footnote 511: _I.e._ in dignity.]

"This to me is a bitter grief, since I have suffered sorrows in my mind.
The maid whom the sons of the Greeks selected as a reward for me, and
[whom] I won by my spear, having sacked a well-fortified city, her has
king Agamemnon, son of Atreus, taken back out of my hands, as from some
dishonoured alien. But we shall allow these things to be among the
things that were;[512] nor is it right, indeed, to be continually
enraged in one's mind. Certainly I affirmed that I would not put a stop
to my wrath, before that clamour and war should reach my ships. But do
thou put on thy shoulders my famous armour, and lead on the war-loving
Myrmidons to battle; since now a black cloud of Trojans hath strongly
surrounded the ships, and the Greeks are hemmed in by the shore of the
sea, possessing now but a small portion of land. And the whole city of
the Trojans has rushed on, confident, because they behold not the front
of my helmet gleaming near. Certainly, quickly flying, would they have
filled the trenches with their bodies, if king Agamemnon had known
mildness to me: but now they are fighting around the army. For the spear
does not rage in the hands of Diomede, the son of Tydeus, to avert
destruction from the Greeks: nor do I at all hear the voice of Agamemnon
shouting from his odious head; but [the voice] of man-slaughtering
Hector, animating the Trojans, resounds: whilst they with a shout
possess the whole plain, conquering the Greeks in battle. Yet even thus,
Patroclus, do thou fall on them bravely, warding off destruction from
the ships; nor let them consume the vessels with blazing fire, and cut
off thy own return. But obey, as I shall lay the sum of my advice in thy
mind, in order that thou mayest obtain for me great honour and glory
from all the Greeks; and they may send back to me the beautiful maid,
and afford [me] besides rich presents. Having repulsed the enemy from
the ships, return back: and if, indeed, the loud-thundering husband of
Juno permit thee to obtain glory, do not be desirous of fighting with
the warlike Trojans apart from me; for thou wouldst render me more
dishonoured; nor, exulting in the battle and havoc, lead on as far as
Ilium, slaughtering the Trojans, lest some of the immortal gods come
down from Olympus [against thee]; for far-darting Apollo greatly loves
them. But return after thou hast given safety to the ships, and allow
the others to contend through the plain. For would that, O father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo, not one of the Trojans, as many as there are, may
escape death, nor any of the Greeks: whilst to us two it [may be
granted] to avoid destruction, that we alone might overthrow the sacred
bulwarks of Troy."

   [Footnote 512: _I.e._ "Let bygones be bygones."--Dublin Ed.]

Thus they indeed discussed these matters with each other. But Ajax no
longer remained firm,[513] for he was pressed hard with weapons; because
the counsel of Jove overpowered him, and the fierce Trojans hurling. And
a dreadful clang did his glittering helmet round his temples emit, being
struck, and he was constantly smitten upon the well-made studs of his
casque. He was fatigued in the left shoulder, by always firmly holding
his moveable shield; nor could they, pressing him all around with their
weapons, drive him [from his place]. Unceasingly afflicted was he with
severe panting, and everywhere from his limbs poured copious
perspiration, nor was he able to respire; for everywhere evil was heaped
upon evil.

   [Footnote 513: Compare the splendid description in Ennius apud
   Macrob. Sat. vi. 3:--

         Undique conveniunt, vel imber, tela Tribuno.
         Configunt parmam, tinnit hastilibus umbo,
         Æratæ sonitant galeæ: sed nec pote quisquam
         Undique nitendo corpus discerpere ferro.
         Semper abundanteis hastas frangitque, quatitque,
         Totum sudor habet corpus, multumque laborat:
         Nec respirandi fit copia præpete ferro.

   Cf. Virg. Æn. ix. 806, sqq.; Stat. Theb. ii. 668, sqq.]

Declare now to me, ye Muses, possessing Olympic habitations, how first
the fire fell upon the ships of the Greeks!

Hector, standing near, struck the ashen spear of Ajax with his great
sword, at the socket of the blade behind, and cut it quite off;
Telamonian Ajax indeed vainly brandished the mutilated spear in his
hand; but the brazen blade rang, falling upon the earth at a distance
from him. Then Ajax knew in his blameless soul, and shuddered at the
deeds of the gods; because the lofty thundering Jove cut off his plans
of war, and willed the victory to the Trojans. Wherefore he retired out
of the reach of the weapons, and they hurled the indefatigable fire at
the swift ships, the inextinguishable flame of which was immediately
diffused around. Thus indeed the flame surrounded the stern; but
Achilles, smiting his thighs, addressed Patroclus:

"Haste, O most noble steed-directing Patroclus (I perceive, indeed, the
fury of the hostile fire at the ships), lest they now take the vessels,
and there be not an opportunity of flying; put on thy armour very
quickly, and I shall assemble the forces."

Thus he spoke; but Patroclus armed himself in glittering brass. First,
indeed, he put the beautiful greaves around his legs, fitted with
clasps; next he placed the corslet of the swift-footed descendant of
Æacus upon his breast, variegated, and studded with stars; and suspended
from his shoulders his silver-studded sword, brazen, and then the great
and sturdy shield. But upon his gallant head he placed the well-made
helmet, crested with horse-hair; and dreadfully the plume nodded from
above. He took besides two strong spears, which well fitted his hands;
but the spear alone of blameless Æacides, ponderous, large, and strong,
he did not take; which, indeed, no other of the Greeks could brandish,
but Achilles alone knew how to wield it; a Pelian ash which Chiron had
given to his sire, [cut] from the tops of Pelion, about to be death to
heroes. He also commanded Automedon quickly to yoke the steeds, whom,
next to rank-breaking Achilles, he most honoured, because he was most
faithful to him in battle, to stand the charge. Wherefore Automedon
yoked the fleet horses, Xanthus and Balius, which kept pace with the
winds. Them the Harpy Podargé bore to Zephyrus, the wind, while feeding
in the meadows by the stream of Oceanus. And in the outer harness he
fastened illustrious Pedasus, whom Achilles led away long since, having
sacked the city of Eëtion; and which [steed], though being mortal,
accompanied immortal steeds. But Achilles, going about, armed all the
Myrmidons through the tents with their armour; but they, like
carnivorous wolves, in whose hearts is immense strength, and which,
having slain a great horned stag in the mountains, tearing, devour it;
but the jaws of all are red with blood: and then they rush in a pack,
lapping with slender tongues the surface of the dark water from a
black-water fountain, vomiting forth clots of blood; but the courage in
their breasts is dauntless, and their stomach is distended: so rushed
the leaders and chiefs of the Myrmidons round the brave attendant of
swift-footed Æacides, and amongst them stood warlike Achilles, animating
both the steeds and the shield-bearing warriors.

Fifty were the swift galleys which Achilles, dear to Jove, led to Troy;
and in each were fifty men, companions at the benches. But he had
appointed five leaders, in whom he put trust, to command them; and he
himself, being very powerful, governed. One troop indeed Menesthius,
with flexible corslet, commanded, the son of Sperchius, a Jove-descended
river; whom the daughter of Peleus, fair Polydora, bore to indefatigable
Sperchius, a woman having been embraced by a god; although, according to
report, to Borus, son of Perieres, who openly espoused her, giving
infinite marriage gifts. But warlike Eudorus commanded another
[company], clandestinely begotten, whom Polymela, the daughter of
Phylas, graceful in the dance, bore. Her the powerful slayer of
Argus[514] loved, beholding her with his eyes among the dancers at a
choir of golden-bowed Diana, huntress-maid; and immediately ascending to
an upper chamber, pacific Mercury secretly lay with her: whence she
bore to him a son, Eudorus, swift to run, and also a warrior. But after
that birth-presiding Ilithyia had brought him into light, and he beheld
the splendour of the sun, the mighty strength of Echecleus, son of
Actor, led her to his house when he had given innumerable
marriage-gifts; whilst aged Phylas carefully nurtured and educated him,
tenderly loving him, as if being his own son. The third, warlike
Pisander led, the son of Mæmalus, who, after the companion of the son of
Peleus, surpassed all the Myrmidons in fighting with the spear. The
fourth, the aged knight Phœnix commanded; and Alcimedon, the illustrious
son of Laërceus, the fifth. But when Achilles, marshalling them well,
had placed all with their leaders, he enjoined this strict command:

"Ye Myrmidons, let none of you be forgetful of the threats with which,
at the swift ships, ye did threaten the Trojans, during all my
indignation, and blamed me, each of you [in this manner]: 'O cruel son
of Peleus! surely thy mother nurtured thee in wrath: relentless! thou
who at the ships detainest thy companions against their will. Let us at
least return home again in our sea-traversing barks, since pernicious
wrath has thus fallen upon thy mind.' These things ye frequently said to
me, when assembled; and now the great task of war appears, of which ye
were hitherto desirous. Let each one here, having a valiant heart, fight
against the Trojans."

   [Footnote 514: Mercury.]

Thus speaking, he aroused the might and spirit of each, and their ranks
were condensed the more when they heard the king. As when a man
constructs the wall of a lofty mansion with closely-joined stones,
guarding against the violence of the winds, so closely were their
helmets and bossed shields linked: then shield pressed upon shield,
helmet upon helmet, and man upon man; and the horse-hair crests upon the
shining cones of [their helmets] nodding, touched each other; so close
stood they to each other. Before all were armed two warriors. Patroclus
and Automedon, having one mind, to fight in the front of the Myrmidons.
But Achilles hastened to go into his tent; and he opened the lid of a
chest, beautiful, variously adorned, which silver-footed Thetis placed,
to be carried in his ship, having filled it well with garments, and
wind-resisting cloaks, and napped tapestry. And in it was a cup
curiously wrought, nor did any other of men drink dark wine from it,
nor did he pour out [from it] libations to any of the gods, except to
father Jove. This then, taking from the coffer, he first purified with
sulphur, and then washed in a crystal rivulet of water; but he himself
washed his hands, and drew off the dark wine. Next, standing in the
middle of the area, he prayed, and offered a libation of wine, looking
up to heaven; nor did he escape the notice of thunder-rejoicing Jove:

"O king Jove, Dodonean, Pelasgian, dwelling afar off, presiding over
wintry Dodona; but around dwell thy priests, the Selli, with unwashed
feet, and sleeping upon the ground; certainly thou didst formerly hear
my voice when praying: thou hast honoured me, and hast greatly injured
the people of the Greeks; wherefore now also accomplish this additional
request for me; for I myself will remain in the assemblage[515] of
ships, but I am sending forth my companion with the numerous Myrmidons
to battle; along with him, do thou send forth glory, O far-sounding
Jove! embolden his heart within his breast, that even Hector may know
whether my attendant, even when alone, knows how to wage war, or [only]
when these invincible hands rage with him, when I likewise go forth to
the slaughter of Mars. But after he has repelled the contest and the
tumult from the ships, unscathed let him return to me, to the swift
barks, with all his armour and his close-fighting companions."

   [Footnote 515: So θεῖον ἀγῶνα, vi. 298. The Scholiast interprets
   it ἐν ναυστάθμῳ.]

Thus he spoke, praying; and provident Jove heard him. One part indeed
the Sire granted him, but refused the other. He granted that he should
repel the conflict and tumult from the ships, but he refused that he
should return safe from the battle. He, on his part, having made a
libation and prayed to father Jove, again entered his tent, and replaced
the cup in the chest. Then coming out, he stood before the tent, for he
still wished in his mind to behold the grievous conflict of Trojans and
Greeks.

But those that were armed at the same time with magnanimous Patroclus,
marched orderly, till they rushed upon the Trojans, with high hopes.
Immediately they were poured out, like unto wasps dwelling by the
road-side, which silly boys are wont to irritate, incessantly harassing
them, possessing cells by the way-side; and cause a common evil to many.
And if by chance any traveller, passing by, unintentionally disturb
them, then they, possessing a valiant heart, all fly forth, and fight
for their young. The Myrmidons then, having the heart and courage of
these, poured out from the ships, and an inextinguishable tumult arose.
But Patroclus cheered on his companions, loudly shouting:

"Ye Myrmidons, companions of Achilles, the son of Peleus, be men, my
friends, and be mindful of impetuous valour; that we, his close-fighting
servants, may honour the son of Peleus, who is by far the bravest of the
Greeks at the ships; and that the son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon,
may know his fault, that he nothing honoured the bravest of the Greeks."

Thus speaking, he aroused the might and spirits of each: and in dense
array they fell upon the Trojans: but the ships re-echoed dreadfully
around from the Greeks shouting. But the Trojans, when they beheld the
brave son of Menœtius, himself and his attendant glittering in arms, the
mind to all of them was disturbed, and the phalanxes were deranged,
deeming that the swift-footed son of Peleus at the ships had cast away
his wrath, and resumed friendship: then each one gazed about where he
might escape utter destruction.

But Patroclus first took aim with his shining spear from the opposite
side right into the midst, where they were huddled together in greatest
numbers at the stern of the ship of magnanimous Protesilaus, and wounded
Pyræchmes, who led the Pæonian equestrian warriors from Amydon, from the
wide-flowing Axius. Him he smote upon the right shoulder, and he fell on
his back in the dust groaning; but the Pæonians, his companions, were
put to flight around him, for Patroclus caused fear to them all, having
slain their leader, who was very brave to fight. And he drove them from
the ships, and extinguished the blazing fire. But the ship was left
there half-burnt, whilst the Trojans were routed with a prodigious
tumult: and the Greeks were poured forth amongst the hollow ships; and
mighty confusion was created. And as when, from the lofty summit of a
great mountain,[516] lightning-driving Jove dislodges a dense cloud, and
all the eminences and highest ridges and glens appear, whilst the
boundless æther is burst open[517] throughout the heaven; so the Greeks
respired for a little, having repelled the hostile fire from their
vessels. But of battle there was no cessation: for the Trojans were by
no means yet totally routed from the black ships by the warlike Greeks,
but still resisted, and retreated from the ships from necessity. Then of
the generals, man slew man, the fight being scattered; and first, the
brave son of Menœtius forthwith with his sharp spear smote the thigh of
Areïlochus when turned about, and drove the brass quite through: but the
spear broke the bone, and he fell prone upon the earth. But warlike
Menelaus then wounded Thoas in the breast, exposed near the shield, and
relaxed his limbs. But Phylides, perceiving Amphiclus rushing against
him, anticipated him, taking aim at the extremity of his leg, where the
calf of a man is thickest; the tendons were severed all round[518] by
the point of the spear, and darkness overshadowed his eyes. Then the
sons of Nestor, the one, Antilochus, struck Atymnius with his sharp
spear, and drove the brazen lance through his flank; and he fell before
him: but Maris, standing before the carcase, rushed upon Antilochus hand
to hand with his spear, enraged on account of his brother; but godlike
Thrasymedes, taking aim, anticipated him before he had wounded
[Antilochus], nor did he miss him, [but wounded him] immediately near
the shoulder; and the point of the spear cut off the extremity of the
arm from the muscles, and completely tore away the bone. Falling, he
made a crash, and darkness veiled his eyes. Thus to Erebus went these
two, subdued by two brothers, the brave companions of Sarpedon, the
spear-renowned sons of Amisodarus, who nourished the invincible[519]
Chimæra, a destruction to many men. But Ajax, the son of Oïleus, rushing
upon Cleobulus, took him alive, impeded in the crowd; and there relaxed
his strength, striking him upon the neck with his hilted sword. And the
whole sword was warmed over with blood, and purple[520] death and stern
fate possessed his eyes.

   [Footnote 516: Milton, P.L. ii. 488:--

       "As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
       Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, o'er-spread
       Heav'n's cheerful face, the louring element
       Scowls o'er the darkened landskip snow, or shower;
       If chance the radiant sun with farewell sweet
       Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
       The birds their notes renew and bleating herds
       Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings."]

   [Footnote 517: Virg. Æn. i. 591:--

      "Vix ea fatus erat, cum circumfusa repente
       Scindit se nubes, et in æthera purgat apertum."

   Cf. Drakenb. on Silius, iii. 196; Kuinoel on Matth. iii. 16; Acts
   vii. 55.]

   [Footnote 518: Heyne would construe αἰχμῇ with περὶ, referring to
   viii. 86; xiii. 441, 570; Pind. Nem. viii. 40.]

   [Footnote 519: On the adjective ἀμαιμακέτην, see intpp. on Soph.
   Œd. R. 176; Œd. Col. 127.]

   [Footnote 520: _I.e._ "atra mors," Tibull. i. 3, 5. Cf. vs. 370:
   Θανάτου μέλαν νέφος.]

Then Peneleus and Lycon engaged in close combat, for they had missed
each other with their spears, and both had hurled in vain;[521]
therefore they ran on again with their swords; then Lycon on his part
struck the cone of the horse-hair-crested helmet, and the sword was
broken at the hilt.

   [Footnote 521: On μέλεος see Kennedy. Suidas: Ὁ μὲν Ποιητὴς
   (_i.e._ Homer) ἐπὶ τοῦ ματαίου ἐνδέχεται τὸ Μέλεος οἱ δὲ
   τραγικοὶ, ἐπὶ τοῦ οἰκτροῦ· So Hesych. μέλεος' μάταιος.]

But Peneleus smote him in the neck below the ear, and the whole sword
entered, and the skin alone retained it: the head hung down, and his
limbs were relaxed.

Meriones also, overtaking him with rapid feet, wounded Acamas in the
right shoulder, as he was about to ascend his chariot; and he fell from
his chariot, and darkness was poured over his eyes.

But Idomeneus struck Erymas in the mouth with the pitiless brass; and
the brazen weapon passed right through from the opposite side down under
the brain, and then cleft the white bones. And his teeth were dashed
out, and both eyes were filled with gore, which, gaping, he forced[522]
out from his mouth and from his nostrils; and the black cloud of death
enveloped him. Thus these leaders of the Greeks slew each a man. And as
destructive wolves impetuously rush on lambs or kids, snatching them
from the flocks, which are dispersed upon the mountains by the
negligence of the shepherd; but they, perceiving them, immediately tear
in pieces them, having an unwarlike heart: so did the Greeks rush upon
the Trojans, but they were mindful of dire-sounding flight, and forgot
resolute valour. But mighty Ajax ever longed to aim his javelin at
brazen-armed Hector; but he, from his skill in war, covering himself as
to his broad shoulders with a bull's-hide shield, watched the hissing of
the arrows and the whizzing of the javelins. Already indeed he knew the
victory of battle was inclining to the other side; yet even thus he
remained, and saved his beloved companions.

   [Footnote 522: Made to rush with a bubbling noise, the verb here
   "expressing the _violent streaming_ of a liquid." See Buttm.
   Lexil. p. 484; and compare my note on Æsch. Ag. p. 137, n. 2, ed.
   Bohn.]

And as when from Olympus comes a cloud into heaven,[523] after a clear
sky, when Jove stretches forth a whirlwind, thus was the clamour and
rout of those [flying] from the ships. Nor did they repass [the trench]
in seemly plight, but his fleet-footed steeds bore away Hector with his
arms; and he deserted the Trojan people, whom against their will the
deep trench detained. And many fleet car-drawing steeds left in the foss
the chariots of their masters, broken at the extremity of the pole. But
Patroclus pursued, vehemently cheering on[524] the Greeks, and devising
destruction for the Trojans; but they, with clamour and rout, filled all
the ways after they were dispersed. A storm [of dust] was tossed up
beneath the clouds, and the solid-hoofed horses pressed back towards the
city, from the ships and tents. But Patroclus, wherever he perceived the
army in greatest confusion, thither directed [his steeds], exclaiming in
a threatening manner; whilst beneath his axles men fell prone from their
chariots, and the chariots were overturned. Then, from the opposite
side, the fleet immortal steeds, which the gods had given as splendid
presents to Peleus, eagerly pressing on, bounded quite across the
trench; for his mind urged him against Hector, for he longed to strike
him, but his swift horses kept bearing him away.

   [Footnote 523: Heaven is here distinguished from Olympus, as in
   i. 597, and Tibull. iv. i. 131:--

        "Jupiter ipse levi vectus per inania curru
        Adfuit, et cœlo vicinum liquit Olympum."]

   [Footnote 524: From this sense of κελεύω arises its nautical
   meaning, also κελευστὴς, the man who gives the signal and cheers
   on the rowers. See Mollus on Long. Past. iii. 14. So Athenæus,
   xii. p. 535: Χρυσόγονος μὲν ἤυλει τὸ τριηρικόν. Καλλιπίδης δὲ ὁ
   τραγῳδὸς ἐκέλευε.]

And as beneath a whirlwind the whole dark earth is oppressed on an
autumnal day, when Jove pours forth his most violent stream; when,
forsooth, enraged he gives vent to his wrath against men, who by
violence decree perverse judgments in the assembly, and drive out
justice, not regarding the vengeance of the gods; and all their rivers
are flooded as they flow, and the torrents sever asunder many mountains,
and flowing headlong into the dark sea, roar mightily, and the
husbandry-works[525] of men are diminished; so loudly moaned the Trojan
mares running along. But Patroclus, when he had cut off the first
phalanxes, drove them back again towards the ships, and did not permit
them, desiring it, to ascend towards the city; but, pressing on, he slew
them between the ships, and the river, and the lofty wall, and he
exacted revenge for many. Then indeed he smote with his shining spear
Pronous first, bared as to his breast beside the shield, and relaxed his
limbs: and falling, he gave a crash. But next, attacking Thestor, son of
Enops (who indeed sat huddled in his well-polished chariot, for he was
panic-struck in his mind, and the reins had then dropped from his
hands), he standing near, smote him with his spear on the right cheek,
and drove it through his teeth. Then catching the spear, he dragged him
over the rim [of the chariot]; as when a man, sitting upon a jutting
rock, [draws] with a line and shining brass[526] a large fish entirely
out of the sea; so he dragged from his chariot with his shining spear,
him gaping. Then he hurled him upon his mouth, and life left him as he
fell. Then next he struck with a stone on the middle of the head,
Eryalus, rushing against him, and it was totally split asunder into two
parts in his strong helmet. He therefore fell prone upon the earth, and
fatal death was diffused around him. Afterwards Erymas, and Amphoterus,
Epaltes, and Tlepolemus, son of Damastor, Echius and Pyris, Icheus,
Euïppus, and Polymelus, son of Argeus, all one over the other he heaped
upon the fertile earth.

   [Footnote 525: For this agricultural use of ἔργα cf. Oppian, Cyn.
   ii. 151: Πάντη δ' ἔργα βοῶν. Nicander, Ther. 473: ἔργα νομέων.
   Virg. Georg. i. 325: "Et pluvia ingenti sata læta, boumque
   labores diluit."]

   [Footnote 526: _I.e._ the hook. So "ære, the brass cutwater,"
   Virg. Æn. i. 35.]

But when Sarpedon perceived his loose-girt[527] companions subdued by
the hands of Patroclus, the son of Menœtius, exhorting, he shouted to
the godlike Lycians:

"Oh shame! Lycians, where do ye fly?[528] Now be strenuous: for I will
oppose this man, that I may know who he is who is victorious: and
certainly he has done many evils to the Trojans, since he has relaxed
the limbs of many and brave men."

He spoke, and leaped from his chariot with his armour to the ground; but
Patroclus, on the other side, when he beheld him, sprang from his car.
Then they, as bent-taloned, crook-beaked vultures, loudly screaming,
fight upon a lofty rock, so they, shouting, rushed against each other.
But the son of the wily Saturn, beholding them, felt compassion, and
addressed Juno, his sister and wife:[529]

"O woe is me, because it is fated that Sarpedon, most dear to me of men,
shall be subdued by Patroclus, the son of Menœtius. But to me, revolving
it in my mind, my heart is impelled with a twofold anxiety,[530] either
that having snatched him alive from the mournful battle, I may place him
among the rich people of Lycia, or now subdue him beneath the hands of
the son of Menœtius."

   [Footnote 527: Τοὺς μὴ ὑποζωννυμένους μίτρας τοῖς
   χιτῶσιν.--Eustath.]

   [Footnote 528: Tzetzes on Hesiod, Opp. 184, reads ἐστόν,
   observing that it is τὸ δυϊκὸν ἀντὶ τοῦ πληθυντικοῦ.]

   [Footnote 529: Virg. Æn. i. 50: "Jovisque et soror et conjux."
   Hor. Od. iii. 3, 64: "Conjuge me Jovis et sorore." Aθson. 343, 4:
   "Et soror et conjux fratris regina dearum."]

   [Footnote 530: Cf. Virg. Æn. iv. 285:--

       "Atque animum nunc huc celerem, nune dividit illuc,
       In partesque rapit varias, perque omnia versat."

   x. 680. Ter. Andr. i. 5, 25. Ovid, Met. vii. 19; x. 373. Plato,
   Rep. iii. p. 433, B. ed. Læm. finds great fault with Homer for
   thus debasing the character of Jove. His remarks are reiterated
   by Clemens Alexandr. Protr. p. 16, 50, and Minucius Felix, § 22.]

Then the large-eyed, venerable Juno answered: "Most dread son of Saturn,
what a word hast thou spoken? Whether dost thou wish to liberate from
sad death a mortal man long since doomed to fate? Do so; but all we, the
other gods, will not assent to it. But another thing I will tell thee,
and do thou revolve it in thy mind. If indeed thou sendest this Sarpedon
safe home, reflect whether some other of the gods may not also wish to
send his beloved son [safe home] from the violent conflict; for many
sons of immortals fight round the great city of Priam, upon whom thou
wilt bring heavy wrath. If, however, he be dear to thee, and thy heart
pities him, let him indeed be subdued in the violent conflict, beneath
the hands of Patroclus, the son of Menœtius: but when his spirit and
life shall have left him, send death and sweet sleep to bear him until
they reach the people of expansive Lycia. There will his brethren and
friends perform his obsequies with a tomb and a pillar; for this is the
honour of the dead."

Thus she spoke, nor did the father of gods and men disobey; but he
poured down upon the earth bloody dew-drops,[531] honouring his beloved
son, whom Patroclus was about to slay in fertile-soiled Troy, far away
from his native land.

   [Footnote 531: There is a similar prodigy in Hesiod, Scut. Here.
   384: Κάδδ' ἄρ' ἀπ' ουρανόθεν ψιάδας βάλεν αἱματοέσσας, Σῆμα
   τιθεὶς πολέμοιο ἑῷ μεγαθαρσέϊ παιδί. Tzetzes there refers to the
   present passage, regarding it as ominous of the death of
   Sarpedon. Cf. Lomeier, De Lustrationibus, xii. p. 143.]

But when, advancing, they were now near each other, then indeed
Patroclus [struck] illustrious Thrasymelus, who was the brave companion
of king Sarpedon, him he struck upon the lower part of the belly, and
relaxed his limbs. Then Sarpedon, attacking second, missed him with his
splendid javelin; but he wounded his horse Pedasus, with his spear, in
the right shoulder; but he groaned, breathing out his life, and fell in
the dust, moaning, and his spirit fled from him. But the two [other
steeds] leaped asunder, and the yoke crashed, and the reins were
entangled about them, when the side horse lay in the dust. But
spear-renowned Automedon found an end of this. Drawing his long sword
from his robust thigh, rising, he cut away the farther horse, nor did he
act slothfully. And the two [remaining horses] were set aright, and were
directed by the reins; and they [the men] again engage in life-devouring
combat.

Then again Sarpedon missed [him] with his shining spear, and the point
of the weapon passed over the left shoulder of Patroclus, nor did it
wound him. But Patroclus rushed on with his javelin, and the weapon did
not escape in vain from his hand, for he struck him where the midriff
encloses the compact[532] heart. And he fell, as when falls some oak, or
poplar, or lofty pine, which the workmen fell in the mountains with
newly-sharpened axes, to be a naval timber: so he lay stretched out
before his horses and chariot, gnashing with his teeth, grasping the
bloody dust. As a lion slays a bull, coming among a herd, tawny,
noble-spirited, among the stamping[533] oxen, and he perishes,
bellowing, beneath the jaws of the lion; so the leader of the shielded
Lycians was indignant,[534] being slain by Patroclus, and addressed his
dear companion by name:

   [Footnote 532: "By comparing the different uses of ἀδινὸς
   together, one thing is clear, that all the meanings which can
   occur in them, proceed from one, which is that in the epithet of
   the heart, _dense_ or _compact_, which physical idea the word
   retains, according to the Homeric usage, in Od. τ. 516, as a
   fixed epithet of the heart, although there its physical state has
   nothing to do with the context." Buttm. Lexil. p. 33.]

   [Footnote 533: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 267.]

   [Footnote 534: "Indignata anima gemebat,"--Heyne, comparing Æn.
   xii. Ult. "Vitaque cum gemitu fugit indignata sub umbras."]

"Glaucus, dear friend, warrior amongst heroes, now it greatly behoves
thee to be a hero and a bold warrior; now if thou art impetuous, let
destructive battle be thy desire. First indeed, going in every
direction, exhort the leaders of the Lycians to fight around Sarpedon,
and do thou thyself also fight for me with thy spear. For I will
hereafter be a cause of shame and disgrace to thee, all thy days,
throughout, if indeed the Greeks despoil me of my armour, falling in the
conflict at the ships. But persevere, and animate all the army."

While he was thus speaking, the end of death covered him as to his eyes
and nostrils; but Patroclus, trampling with his heel upon his breast,
drew out the spear from his body, and the midriff[535] followed with it;
and he drew out at the same time his life and the point of the weapon.
But the Myrmidons there held his panting steeds, eager to fly along,
since they had quitted the chariots of their lords. Then bitter grief
arose to Glaucus, hearing the voice [of his friend], and his heart was
grieved because he could not aid him. But grasping his own arm in his
hand, he compressed it; for grievously the wound pained him, which
Teucer, with an arrow, had inflicted upon him, as he was rushing against
the lofty wall, warding off the battle from his companions. Wherefore,
praying, he addressed far-darting Apollo:

   [Footnote 535: Probably the _pericardium_ is meant.]

"Hear, O king, thou who art somewhere in the rich state of Lycia, or in
Troy; for thou canst everywhere hear a man afflicted, as sorrow now
comes upon me. For indeed I have this grievous wound, and my hand is
penetrated on every side with acute pains, nor can the blood be
stanched, but my shoulder is oppressed with it. For neither can I firmly
I hold my spear, nor, advancing, fight with the enemy; moreover a very
brave hero has fallen, Sarpedon, the son of Jove; but he aids not even
his own son. But heal for me this severe wound, O king; assuage my
pains, and grant me strength, that, cheering on my companions, the
Lycians, I may urge them to fight; and may myself fight for the dead
body."

Thus he spoke praying; but Phœbus Apollo heard him. Immediately he
allayed the pains, and dried the black gore from the grievous wound, and
instilled strength into his soul. But Glaucus knew in his mind, and
rejoiced because the mighty god had quickly heard him praying. First
then, going about in all directions, he aroused the heroes, leaders of
the Lycians, to fight for Sarpedon; and then he went to the Trojans,
advancing with long strides to Polydamas, son of Panthous, and noble
Agenor. He also went after Æneas and brazen-armed Hector, and, standing
near, addressed to him winged words:

"O Hector, now hast thou altogether neglected thine allies, who are
losing their lives for thy sake, far away from their friends and
father-land; but thou dost not wish to aid them. Sarpedon lies low, the
leader of the shield-bearing Lycians, who protected Lycia by his justice
and his valour. Him hath brazen Mars subdued with a spear at the hands
of Patroclus. But stand near, my friends, and be indignant in your
minds, lest the Myrmidons spoil his armour, and unworthily treat the
body, enraged on account of the Greeks, as many as have perished, whom
we have slain with our spears at the ships."

Thus he spoke; but intolerable, unyielding grief wholly possessed the
Trojans, for he had been a pillar of their city, though being a
foreigner; for many forces followed along with him, among whom he
himself was the most valiant in battle. They therefore advanced eagerly
straight against the Greeks, ardent with desire; but Hector led the way,
enraged on account of Sarpedon. But the valiant heart of Patroclus, son
of Menœtius, aroused the Greeks. First he addressed the Ajaces, though
they themselves were also eager:

"O Ajaces, now let it be a delightful thing to you both to repel [the
foe]; be ye such as of old ye were amongst heroes, or even braver.
Sarpedon lies low, the man who first broke through[536] the wall of the
Greeks. But oh! that taking him, we could treat him with indignity, and
spoil the armour from his shoulders, and subdue with the cruel brass
some one of his companions keeping [us] off from him."

   [Footnote 536: We must understand him as having done so in
   company with Hector, otherwise this passage would be at variance
   with xii. 290, 437.]

Thus he spoke; but they also themselves were ready to repel [the foe].
But when they had strengthened their phalanxes on both sides, the
Trojans and Lycians, as well as the Myrmidons and Achæans, they closed
to fight round the dead body, shouting dreadfully, and loudly rattled
the arms of men. But Jove stretched pernicious night over the violent
contest, that there might be a destructive toil of battle around his
dear son. The Trojans first drove back the rolling-eyed Greeks; for a
man was smitten, by no means the most inferior among the Myrmidons,
noble Epigeus, son of magnanimous Agacles, who formerly ruled in
well-inhabited Budium; but then having slain a noble kinsman, he came as
a suppliant to Peleus and silver-footed Thetis: they sent him to follow
with the rank-breaker Achilles, to steed-renowned Ilium, that he might
fight with the Trojans. Him then, while seizing the body, illustrious
Hector struck upon the head with a stone; and it was entirely split in
two in his strong helmet; and he fell prone upon the corpse, and
soul-destroying death was diffused around him. Then to Patroclus grief
arose, on account of his companion slain; and he rushed right through
the foremost warriors, like unto a swift hawk, which has put to flight
jackdaws or starlings; so, O equestrian Patroclus, didst thou rush right
against the Lycians and Trojans; for thou wert enraged in thine heart
for thy companion. And he struck Sthenelaus, the beloved son of
Ithæmeneus, on the neck with a stone, and broke his tendons: and the
foremost warriors and illustrious Hector gave back. And as far as is
the cast of a long javelin, which a man may have sent forth striving
either in the game, or even in war, on account of life-destroying
enemies; so far did the Trojans retire, and the Greeks repelled them.
But Glaucus, the leader of the shield-bearing Lycians, first turned, and
slew magnanimous Bathycles, the beloved son of Chalcon, who, inhabiting
dwellings in Hellas, was conspicuous among the Myrmidons for his riches
and wealth. Him then Glaucus, turning suddenly round, wounded in the
middle of the breast with his spear, when, pursuing, he had overtaken
him. But he made a crash as he fell; and deep grief possessed the
Greeks, because a brave warrior had thus fallen; but the Trojans greatly
rejoiced, and, advancing in crowds, stood round him; nor were the Greeks
forgetful of valour, but they directed their strength straight against
them. Then again Meriones slew a hero of the Trojans, the warrior
Laogonus, the gallant son of Onetor, who was the priest of Idæan Jove,
and was honoured like a god by the people. He smote him under the jaw
and ear, and his soul immediately departed from his limbs, and dreadful
darkness overshadowed him.[537] But Æneas hurled a brazen spear at
Meriones, for he hoped to hit him, advancing under protection of his
shield. He, however, observing it in front, avoided the brazen spear;
for he stooped forward, and the long javelin was fixed in the ground
behind him, and the nether point[538] of the spear was shaken; then the
rapid weapon spent its force. Thus the javelin of Æneas, quivering
entered the earth, for it had fled in vain from his strong hand. Then
Æneas was enraged in his mind, and said:

"Meriones, quickly indeed, although being a dancer,[539] would my spear
have made thee cease for ever, if I had struck thee."

   [Footnote 537: It has been well observed that Homer never
   describes a wound as mortal, except when it is inflicted in a
   part really vital.]

   [Footnote 538: The οὐρίαχος was the same as the σαυρωτὴρ. See
   Glossæ Herodoteæ, and Hesych. p. 820.]

   [Footnote 539: A probable allusion to the Pyrrhic dance, which
   was in use among the Cretans, from whose country Meriones had
   come. See the Scholiast, and Müller, Dorians, vol. ii, p. 349.]

But him then in turn spear-renowned Meriones answered: "Æneas, it were
difficult for thee, although being brave, to extinguish the valour of
all men, whosoever may come against thee about to repulse thee; for thou
too art mortal. And if I, taking aim, should strike thee in the middle
with my sharp spear, although being brave, and confiding in thy might,
thou wouldst give glory to me, but thy soul to steed-famed Pluto."

Thus he spoke; but him the brave son of Menœtius rebuked: "Meriones, why
dost thou, although being brave, harangue thus? O, my friend, the
Trojans will not retire from the corse by opprobrious words: first will
the earth possess some of them; for the emergency of battle is placed in
the hands, but of counsel in words; wherefore it is by no means
necessary to multiply words, but to fight."

So saying, he on his part led the way, and along with him the godlike
hero followed. And as the crash of woodcutting men arises in the dells
of a mountain, and the sound is heard from afar; so the noise of these,
smitten with swords and two-edged spears, arose from the wide-extended
plain, from brass, from leather, and from well-prepared bull's-hide
shields. Nor would a man, although very discerning, have recognized
noble Sarpedon, since he was totally involved, from his head to the
soles of his feet, with weapons, and blood, and dust. But they still
crowded round the corse, as when flies in the stall hum around the pails
full of milk, during the spring season, when the milk makes moist the
vessel. So they still crowded round the body: nor did Jove ever turn his
bright eyes from the violent conflict; but he ever beheld them, and
meditated many evil things in his mind concerning the death of
Patroclus, anxiously deliberating whether now illustrious Hector should
kill him with his spear in the brave battle, over godlike Sarpedon, and
spoil the armour from his shoulders, or whether he should still increase
the severe labour to the multitude. To him, thus reflecting, it appeared
better that the brave servant of Achilles, the son of Peleus, should
repulse the Trojans and brazen-armed Hector, towards the city, and take
away the life of many. Into Hector, therefore, first [of all], he sent
unwarlike flight, and ascending his chariot, he turned himself to
flight, and advised the other Trojans to fly, for he recognized the
sacred scales of Jove.[540] Then not even the brave Lycians remained,
but were all turned in flight, when they beheld their king wounded to
the heart, lying in the heap of dead; for many had fallen over him,
whilst the son of Saturn stretched on the violent strife. But after they
had taken from the shoulders of Sarpedon the brazen and glittering
armour, the gallant son of Menœtius gave them to his companions to carry
to the hollow ships; and then cloud-compelling Jove addressed Apollo:

"Come now, dear Phœbus, going, cleanse Sarpedon, [withdrawn] from among
the heap of weapons, of sable gore, and afterwards bearing him far away,
lave him in the stream of the river, and anoint him with ambrosia, and
put around him immortal garments, then give him in charge to the
twin-brothers. Sleep and Death, swift conductors, to be borne away, who
will quickly place him in the rich state of wide Lycia. There will his
brethren and kindred perform his obsequies with a tomb and a
pillar,[541] for this is the honour of the dead."

   [Footnote 540: _I.e._ He perceived that the fortune of the battle
   was changed by the will of Jove.]

   [Footnote 541: _I.e._ A cippus, or column reared upon the tomb.
   See Pollux, viii. 14, and the Scriptores Rei Agrim. p. 88, ed.
   Goes.]

Thus he spoke; nor was Apollo inattentive to his father, but he
descended from the Idæan mountains to the grievous conflict. Immediately
removing noble Sarpedon out of [the reach of] weapons, and bearing him
far away, he laved him in the stream of the river, anointed him with
ambrosia, and placed around him immortal garments, then gave him in
charge to the twin-brothers, Sleep and Death, swift conductors, to be
borne away with them; who accordingly quickly placed him in the rich
state of wide Lycia.

In the meantime Patroclus, cheering on his steeds, and Automedon,
followed upon the Trojans and Lycians, and came to great
harm,--infatuate one!--but if he had observed the direction of the son
of Peleus, he had certainly escaped the evil fate of black death. But
the counsel of Jove is ever better than that of men, who puts to flight
even the valiant man, and easily deprives him of victory, even when he
himself has impelled him to fight; who then also excited courage in his
breast. Then whom first, and whom last, didst thou slay, O Patroclus,
when the gods now called thee on to death? Adrastus indeed first,
Autonous and Echeclus, and Perimus, son of Megas, and Epistor and
Melanippus; but then Elasus, and Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew,
but the others were, each of them, mindful of flight. Then indeed had
the sons of the Greeks taken lofty-gated Troy, by the hands of
Patroclus, for he raged greatly beyond [others] with his spear, had not
Phœbus Apollo stood upon a well-built tower, meditating destructive
things to him, and assisting the Trojans. Thrice indeed Patroclus
mounted a buttress of the lofty wall, and thrice did Apollo repel him
with violence, striking his glittering shield with his immortal hands.
But when now, godlike, he rushed on the fourth time, far-casting
Apollo, threatening fearfully, addressed him:

"Retire, thou Jove-sprung Patroclus; by no means is it destined that the
city of the magnanimous Trojans should be destroyed by thy spear, nor by
Achilles, who is much better than thou."

Thus he spoke, but Patroclus retired far back, avoiding the wrath of
far-darting Apollo. But Hector detained his steeds at the Scæan[542]
gates; for he doubted whether, having driven again into the crowd, he
should fight, or should loudly command the people to be collected within
the walls. To him then, meditating these things, Phœbus Apollo stood
near, having assimilated himself to a hero youthful and brave, to Asius,
who was the maternal uncle of horse-breaking Hector, own brother of
Hecuba, and the son of Dymas, who dwelt in Phrygia, by the streams of
the Sangarius: to him Phœbus Apollo, assimilating himself, spoke:

   [Footnote 542: Schneider on Nicander, Ther. 264-9, p. 229,
   observes: "In Homerica Iliade fuerunt olim qui Σκαιὰς πύλας, quæ
   alibi Dardaniæ dicuntur, interpretabantur obliquas, teste
   Hesychio: ἢ διὰ τὸ σκολιὰς εἶναι κατὰ τὴν εἰσβολήν. Plane uti
   Servius ad Æn. iii. 351: 'Scæa porta dicta est--nec ab itinere
   ingressis scævo id est sinistro, quod ingressi non recto sed
   sinistro eunt itinere, sed a cadavere Laomedontis, hoc est
   scæomate, quod in ejus fuerit superliminio.' Ita Vitruvius, i. 5,
   2; unde vides, quomodo notio _sinistri_ et _obliqui_ in hac voce
   coaluerit. Notio ipsa serius tandem invaluisse videtur:
   antiquiorem enim Nicandreo locum ignore."]

"Hector, why dost thou cease from battle? Nor does it at all become
thee. Would that I were so much superior to thee as I am inferior; then
indeed wouldst thou quickly have retired from the battle to thy loss.
But come, direct thy solid-hoofed steeds against Patroclus, if perchance
thou mayest slay him, and Apollo may give thee glory." So saying, the
god on his part went again through the labour of men; but illustrious
Hector on his part commanded warlike Cebriones to lash on his steeds to
the battle, whilst Apollo, proceeding, entered the throng; and sent an
evil tumult among the Greeks; but gave glory to the Trojans and Hector.
Then indeed did Hector neglect the other Greeks, nor slew them; but
directed his solid-hoofed horses against Patroclus. But Patroclus, on
the other side, leaped from his chariot to the ground, in his left hand
holding his spear; but in the other he seized a stone, white, rugged,
which his hand embraced around. Putting his force to it, he hurled it;
nor did it err far from the man, nor was the weapon hurled in
vain,[543] for in the forehead with the sharp stone he smote the
charioteer of Hector, Cebriones, the illegitimate son of illustrious
Priam, whilst holding the reins of the horses. But the stone crushed
both his eyebrows, nor did the bone sustain it, and his eyes fell amid
the dust upon the ground before his feet. But he then, like unto a
diver, fell from the well-formed chariot-seat, and life left his bones.
But him insulting, thou didst address, O equestrian Patroclus:

   [Footnote 543: See Kennedy. Others make βέλος the accusative, and
   take ἁλίωσε transitively.]

"O gods! truly he is a very active man! how nimbly he dives! if indeed
he were anywhere in the fishy sea, this man, groping for oysters, might
have satisfied many, plunging from his ship, although it might be
stormy; so easily now in the plain does he dive from his chariot!
Without doubt there are divers among the Trojans."

So saying, he advanced against the hero Cebriones, having the force of a
lion, which, ravaging the folds, is wounded in the breast, and his own
courage destroys him; thus, O Patroclus, ardent, didst thou spring upon
Cebriones; whilst Hector, on the other side, leaped from his chariot to
the ground. These two, as lions, fought for Cebriones, when both being
hungry fight with utmost courage for a slaughtered stag in mountain
tops. So, for Cebriones, these two masters of the fight, Patroclus, son
of Menœtius, and illustrious Hector, wished to rend each other's body
with the pitiless brass. Hector indeed, after he seized him by the head,
did not let him go; but Patroclus, on the other side, held [him by the]
foot; and now the rest of the Trojans and Greeks engaged in the violent
conflict.

And as the East and South winds strive with each other, in the dells of
a mountain, to shake a deep wood, beech, ash, and rugged cornel, but
they strike their long-extended boughs against each other with an
immense sound, and a crash of them breaking [arises]; thus the Trojans
and Greeks, leaping upon each other, slaughtered, but neither were
mindful of pernicious flight. And many sharp spears were fixed round
Cebriones, and winged arrows bounding from the string; and many huge
stones smote the shields of those fighting round him; but he, mighty
over mighty space, lay in a whirlwind of dust, forgetful of his
equestrian skill.

As long indeed as the sun was ascending the middle heaven, so long did
the weapons reach both sides effectually, and the people kept falling.
But when the sun had passed over towards the west, then indeed the
Greeks were superior, contrary to fate. They drew the hero Cebriones
from the weapons, out of the tumult of Trojans, and took the armour from
his shoulders. But Patroclus, devising evils against the Trojans, rushed
on. Thrice then he charged, equal to swift Mars, shouting horridly, and
thrice he slew nine heroes. But when, like unto a god, he made the
attack for the fourth time, then indeed, O Patroclus, was the end of thy
life manifest; for Phœbus, terrible in the dire battle, met thee. He did
not indeed perceive him coming through the crowd, for he advanced
against him covered with much darkness; but he stood behind, and smote
him with his flat hand upon the back and broad shoulders, and his eyes
were seized with giddiness.[544] And from his head Phœbus Apollo struck
the helmet, and the oblong helmet rattled, rolling under the horses'
feet, and the crest was defiled with blood and dust; although before
this it was not permitted that [this] helmet, crested with horse-hair,
should be contaminated by the dust; for it protected the head of a
godlike hero, even the venerable forehead of Achilles; but Jove then
gave it to Hector to wear upon his head; but his destruction was near.
But the long-shadowed spear, great, sturdy, pointed [with brass], was
utterly shattered in his hands; whilst the shield, which reached to his
heels, with its belt, fell to the ground; and king Apollo, the son of
Jove, unbound his corslet. But stupor seized his brain, and his fair
limbs were relaxed under him, and he stood astounded. But a Trojan,
hero, Euphorbus, the son of Panthous, who excelled those of his own age
in the spear, in horsemanship, and in swiftness of foot, smote him close
at hand with his sharp spear, in the back between the shoulders. For
even before this he had hurled twenty men from their horses, at first
coming with his chariot, learning [the art] of war. He [it was] who
first hurled a weapon at thee, O knight Patroclus, nor did he subdue
thee; for he ran back, and was mingled with the crowd, having plucked
the ashen spear out of thy body; nor did he await Patroclus, though
being unarmed, in the fight. Patroclus, however, subdued by the blow of
the god, and by the spear, retired into the crowd of his companions,
avoiding death. But Hector, when he perceived magnanimous Patroclus
retiring, wounded with a sharp spear, went through the ranks near him,
and smote him with his javelin in the lowest part of the groin, and
drove the brass quite through. Falling, he gave a crash, and greatly
grieved the people of the Greeks. As when a lion presses on an unwearied
boar in fight, and they twain, high spirited, contend upon the mountain
tops for a small rill, for they both desire to drink, but the lion
subdues him by force, panting much; so Hector, the son of Priam, in
close fight with his spear, deprived the gallant son of Menœtius of
life, having slain many; and, boasting over him, spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 544: Swam round, probably from exhaustion. Celsus; i.
   3: "Si quando insuetus aliquis laboravit, aut si multo plus, quam
   solet, etiam is qui assuevit...... oculi caligant." The affection
   is well described by Cælius Aurol. Chron. i. 2: "Repentina visus
   tenebratio, atque nebula, cum capitis vertigine."]

"Patroclus, doubtless thou didst think to waste our city, and to carry
off in thy ships the Trojan women to thy dear father-land, having taken
away their day of freedom,--infatuated one! But in defence of these, the
fleet steeds of Hector hasten with their feet to war, and I myself, who
avert the day of slavery[545] from them, am conspicuous amongst the
war-loving Trojans in [the use of] the spear. But the vultures shall
devour thee here. Unhappy man! Nor indeed did Achilles, although being
brave, aid thee, who remaining behind, doubtless enjoined many things to
thee, going forth: 'Do not return to me, O equestrian Patroclus, to the
hollow barks, before thou rendest the blood-stained garment around the
breast of man-slaughtering Hector.' Thus, doubtless, he addressed thee,
and persuaded the mind of foolish thee."

But him, O knight Patroclus, breathing faintly, thou didst address:
"Even now, Hector, vaunt greatly, for Jove, the son of Saturn, and
Apollo, have given thee the victory, who subdued me easily; for they
stripped the armour from my shoulders. But if even twenty such [as thou]
had opposed me, they had all perished here, subdued by my spear. But
destructive fate, and the son of Latona, have slain me, and of men,
Euphorbus; whilst thou, the third, dost despoil me slain. Another thing
will I tell thee, and do thou ponder it in thy soul.[546] Not long,
indeed, shalt thou thyself advance in life, but death and violent fate
already stand near thee, subdued by the hands of Achilles, the blameless
descendant of Æacus."

   [Footnote 545: So ἐλεύθερον ἧμαρ in ver. 830. Thus ἀνάγκη
   ἀμφίπτολις, "slavery caused by the capture of a city," Æsch.
   Choeph. 75.]

   [Footnote 546: This prophecy of the dying Patroclus seems to have
   attracted the notice of Aristotle, if we may believe Sextus,
   Empir. adv. Phys. ix. p. 553: "Οταν γάρ, φησίν, ἐν τῷ ὑπνοῦν καθ'
   ἑαυτὴν γίνεται ἡ ψυχή, τότε τὴν ἴδιον ἀπολαβοῦσα φύσιν
   προμαντεύεται τε καὶ προαγορεύει τὰ μέλλοντα' τοιαύτη δέ ἐστι καὶ
   ἐν τῷ κατὰ τὸν θάνατον χωρίζεσθαι τῶν σωμάτων." He then refers to
   the similar example of Hector prophesying the death of Achilles,
   xxiii. 358, sqq.]

Him then, having thus spoken, the end of death then overshadowed. But
his soul flying from his members, departed to Hades, bewailing its
lot,[547] relinquishing manliness and youth. But him dead illustrious
Hector addressed:

"Why now, Patroclus, dost thou prophesy cruel destruction to me? Who
knows whether Achilles, the son of fair-haired Thetis, stricken by my
spear, may not be the first to lose his life?"

   [Footnote 547: See my note on προῖαψεν, II. i. 3. and Heyne.]

Thus having spoken, he extracted the brazen spear from the wound,
pressing on him with his heel; and thrust him prostrate from the spear.
Then immediately, with the spear, he went against Automedon, the godlike
servant of swift-footed Æacides, for he was anxious to strike him. But
the fleet immortal steeds, which the gods bestowed on Peleus, splendid
gifts, bore him away.




                         BOOK THE SEVENTEENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Euphorbus, attempting to despoil Patroclus of his armour, is slain by
Menelaus. It falls to the lot of Hector, but he retires on the approach
of Ajax. Being rebuked by Glaucus, he returns, and a fierce contest is
renewed over the body of Patroclus. The chariot of Achilles is bravely
defended by Automedon, but the Greeks at last begin to give way, even
Ajax being seized with consternation. Meriones and Menelaus, however,
succeed in carrying off the body of Patroclus, although the Greeks are
completely routed.


Nor did Patroclus, subdued in fight by the Trojans, escape the notice of
the son of Atreus, Mars-beloved Menelaus; but he advanced through the
foremost warriors, armed in glittering brass. And round him he walked,
like a dam around its calf, having brought forth for the first time,
moaning, not being before conscious of parturition: thus did
yellow-haired Menelaus walk around Patroclus. But before him he extended
his spear, and his shield on all sides equal, anxious to slay him,
whoever indeed should come against him. Nor was the son of Panthus, of
the good ashen spear, neglectful of blameless Patroclus, fallen; but he
stood near him, and addressed warlike Menelaus:

"O Menelaus! son of Atreus, Jove-nurtured one, leader of the people,
retire, and leave the body, and let alone the bloody spoils; for not any
of the illustrious Trojans or allies smote Patroclus with the spear in
the violent conflict before me. Wherefore permit me to bear away the
great glory amongst the Trojans, lest I should strike thee, and take
away thy sweet life."

But him yellow-haired Menelaus, very indignant, addressed:

"Father Jove, certainly it is not fitting to boast inordinately. Not so
great is the might of a panther, nor a lion, nor of a destructive wild
boar, whose most mighty courage rages in his heart, violently in its
strength, as much as the sons of Panthus, of the good ashen spear,
breathe forth. Nor did the might of horse-breaking Hyperenor enjoy his
youth, when he reproached me, and withstood me; and said that I was the
most reproachful warrior amongst the Greeks; nor did he, I think,
returning upon his feet, gratify his dear wife and respected parents.
Thus certainly will I dissolve thy strength, if thou wilt stand against
me. But I advise thee, retiring, to go back into the crowd; nor do thou
stand against me, before thou suffer any harm: for it is a fool that
perceives a thing when it is done." [548]

   [Footnote 548: Cf. Hesiod, Opp. 216: Παθὼν δέ τε νήπιος ἔγνω.
   Plato, Sympos. p. 336, A.: Ἀλλ' ἀπὸ τῶν ἡμετέρων παθημάτων
   γνόντα, εὐλαβηθῆναι, καὶ μὴ, κατὰ τὴν παροιμίαν, ὥσπερ νήπιον,
   παθόντα γνῶναι. Æsch. Ag. 177: Τὸν πάθει μάθος θέντα κυρίως
   ἔχειν--καὶ παρ' ἄκοντας ἤλθε σωφρονεῖν. See Proclus on Hesiod,
   Opp. 89.]

Thus he spoke, but persuaded him not; but he answering, spoke:

"Now indeed, O Jove-nurtured Menelaus, shalt thou make atonement for my
brother, whom thou hast slain, and [over whom] thou speakest boastingly;
and thou hast widowed his wife in the recess of her new bridal chamber,
and caused accursed mourning and sorrow to his parents. Certainly I
should be some alleviation of woe to them wretched, if indeed, bearing
back thy head and armour, I should place them in the hands of Panthus
and noble Phrontis. Nor shall the labour of valour or flight be untried
or invincible any longer."

So saying, he smote [him] upon the shield equal on all sides, nor did
the brass break through, for the point was bent in the stout shield: and
Menelaus, the son of Atreus, next made the attack with his brazen spear,
having prayed to father Jove. He smote him upon the lowest part of the
gullet as he retired, and he himself forcibly impressed [the spear],
relying on his strong hand; and the point went quite through his soft
neck. And falling, he made a crash, and his armour rang upon him. And
his locks, like unto the Graces, were bedewed with blood, and his curls,
which were bound with gold and silver. And as a man rears a
widely-blooming plant of olive, fair budding, in a solitary place, where
water is wont to spring[549] up in abundance, and which the breezes of
every wind agitate, and it buds forth with a white flower; but a wind,
suddenly coming on with a mighty blast, overturns it from the furrow,
and stretches it upon the earth: so the son of Panthus, Euphorbus,
skilled in [the use of] the ashen spear, Menelaus, son of Atreus, when
he had slain [him], spoiled of his armour. As when any mountain-nurtured
lion, relying on his strength, has carried off from the pasturing herd a
heifer, which is the best; but first he breaks its neck, seizing it in
his strong teeth, and then tearing it in pieces, laps up the blood and
all the entrails; whilst around him dogs and herdsmen shout very
frequently from a distance, nor do they wish to go against him, for pale
fear violently seizes them: thus the soul of no one within his breast
dared to advance against glorious Menelaus. Then indeed the son of
Atreus had easily borne off the celebrated arms of the son of Panthus,
had not Phœbus Apollo envied him, who immediately aroused Hector, equal
to fleet Mars, against him, assimilating himself to the hero Mentes,
leader of the Cicones; and addressing him, he spoke winged words:

"Hector, now indeed thou art thus running, pursuing things not to be
overtaken, the steeds of warlike Achilles; they indeed are difficult to
be managed by mortal men, or to be driven by any other than Achilles,
whom an immortal mother bore. In the meanwhile Menelaus, the warlike son
of Atreus, protecting Patroclus, has slain the bravest of the Trojans,
Euphorbus, the son of Panthus, and made him cease from impetuous
valour."

   [Footnote 549: This perfect has much the same usage as ἐπενήνοθε,
   219.]

Thus having spoken, the god on his part again departed into the labour
of the men; but heavy grief oppressed Hector as to his dark soul. Then,
indeed, he looked around through the ranks, and immediately observed the
one bearing away the famous armour, and the other lying upon the ground;
and the blood flowed through the inflicted wound. But he advanced
through the foremost warriors, armed in shining brass, shrilly shouting,
like unto the inextinguishable flame of Vulcan. Nor did he escape the
notice of the son of Atreus, loudly exclaiming; but he, deeply sighing,
thus communed with his own great-hearted soul:

"Ah me! if I leave the beautiful armour and Patroclus, who lies here for
the sake of my honour, [I dread] lest some one of the Greeks, whoever
perceives it, will be indignant; but if, being alone, I fight with
Hector and the Trojans, from shame, [I fear] lest many surround me,
[being] alone. But crest-tossing Hector is leading all the Trojans
hither. But wherefore has my soul been thus debating? Whenever a man
desires, in opposition to a deity, to fight with a hero whom a god
honours, soon is a great destruction hurled upon him; wherefore no one
of the Greeks will blame me, who may perceive me retiring from Hector,
since he wars under the impulse of a god. But if I could hear Ajax,
brave in the din of war, both of us, again returning, would be mindful
of battle even against a god, if by any means we could draw off the body
for the sake of Achilles, the son of Peleus: of evils, certainly it
would be the better." [550]

   [Footnote 550: "The evil here spoken of, and of which a choice is
   presented to Menelaus, are loss of both the body and the armour
   of Patroclus, or of either separately. The first alternative he
   is resolved on guarding against by summoning Ajax to his aid; of
   the last two, he prefers the abandonment of the arms, _i.e._
   σύλη, spoliation of the corpse, to ἀείκεια, its
   disfigurement."--Kennedy.]

While he was thus deliberating these things in his mind and soul, the
ranks of the Trojans were meanwhile advancing; and Hector led the way.
But he retired back, and quitted the corpse, turning round as a
shaggy-bearded lion, which dogs and men drive from the stall with spears
and clamour; out his valiant heart within his breast is shaken, and he,
unwilling, departs from the fold: thus did yellow-haired Menelaus retire
from Patroclus. And being turned round, he stood, when he had reached
the band of his companions, looking all around for mighty Ajax, the son
of Telamon; whom he very quickly perceived upon the left of the whole
battle, encouraging his companions, and urging them to fight: for Phœbus
Apollo had cast a heaven-sent panic amongst them. But he made haste to
run, and, immediately standing near, spoke:

"Ajax, hither, friend, let us hasten in defence of slain Patroclus, if
we can bear his naked corse at least to Achilles; for his armour
crest-tossing Hector possesses."

Thus he spoke, but he roused the courage of warlike Ajax, and he
advanced through the foremost warriors, and with him yellow-haired
Menelaus. Hector on his part, after he had despoiled him of his
beautiful armour, was dragging Patroclus, that he might sever the head
from the shoulders with the sharp brass, and, carrying off the body,
might give it to the Trojan dogs, when Ajax came near, bearing his
shield, like a tower. Then Hector, retiring back, retreated into the
throng of his companions, and sprung up into his chariot; but he gave
the handsome armour to the Trojans to carry to the city, to be a great
glory to him. But Ajax, with his broad shield covering around the son of
Menœtius, stood like a lion over her young; against which, when leading
her whelps, the huntsmen rush together in the wood; whilst he looks
dreadful in his might, and draws down all his eyebrows, concealing his
eyes: so strode Ajax round the hero Patroclus. On the other side stood
the son of Atreus, warlike Menelaus, augmenting the great grief in his
bosom.

But Glaucus, the son of Hippolochus, leader of the Lycian heroes,
looking sternly at Hector, upbraided him with harsh language: "Hector,
most excellent as to appearance, certainly thou art greatly deficient
in fighting; doubtless good fame possesses thee without reason, since
thou art a fugitive. Consider now, how alone with the people [who are]
born in Ilium, thou mayest preserve the state and city, for none of the
Lycians, at all events, will go to fight with the Greeks for thy city;
since indeed there is no gratitude for fighting ever incessantly with
hostile men. How indeed, inglorious one, hast thou preserved an inferior
man in the throng, and suffered Sarpedon, at once thy guest and
companion, to become a prey and booty to the Greeks; who, when alive,
was a great advantage to thy city and thyself; but now thou didst not
attempt to drive away the dogs from him. Wherefore if any of the Lycian
warriors will now obey me, go home,[551] and utter destruction will be
manifest to Troy. For if now that confident, intrepid strength, was in
the Trojans, which enters heroes who in the defence of their country
undertake toil, and conflict with hostile men, immediately might we draw
Patroclus into Ilium. But if he, lifeless, should come to the great city
of king Priam, and we had drawn him away from the battle, quickly indeed
would the Greeks ransom [to us] the beautiful armour of Sarpedon, and we
might bear himself also into Troy; for the attendant of that man is
slain, who is by far the bravest of the Greeks at the ships, and whose
servants are close-fighting warriors. But thou, forsooth, hast not dared
to stand against magnanimous Ajax, beholding his eyes in the battle of
the enemy, nor to fight against him; for he is more brave than thou."

   [Footnote 551: Take ἴμεν (ἰέναι) imperatively, or understand
   ἐπιπείσεται ἐμοὶ ὤστε αὐτὸν ἰέναι εἰς οἷκον, ἄμεινον ἂν εἴη οὕτως
   ἄρα ὄλεθρος, κ. τ. λ. See Kennedy.]

But him sternly regarding, crest-tossing Hector addressed: "O Glaucus,
why hast thou, being such as thou art, spoken haughtily? I' faith,
friend, I thought that thou didst excel in judgment the others, as many
as inhabit fertile Lycia; but now I altogether blame thy understanding,
since thou hast thus spoken, thou who sayest that I do not withstand
mighty Ajax. Neither have I dreaded the battle, nor the tumult of
steeds; but the counsel of ægis-bearing Jove is ever superior, who puts
even the valiant man to flight, and easily takes away the victory; but
at another time he himself impels him to fight. But come hither, my
friend, stand by me, and behold my conduct. Truly I shall always be a
coward, as thou sayest, or I will restrain even some of the Greeks,
although very eager, from keeping defence over dead Patroclus."

Thus saying, he cheered on the Trojans, loudly shouting, "Ye Trojans and
Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my friends, and be
mindful of impetuous valour, whilst I put on the armour of illustrious
Achilles, beautiful, of which I despoiled mighty Patroclus, having slain
him."

Thus having spoken, crest-tossing Hector departed from the glowing
battle, and, running very quickly, overtook his companions, not far off,
following with swift feet those who were bearing towards the city the
renowned arms of Achilles. Then standing apart from the mournful battle,
he changed his armour. His own indeed he gave to the warlike Trojans to
bear to sacred Ilium; but he put on the immortal arms of Achilles, the
son of Peleus, which the heavenly gods had bestowed on his dear father;
but he indeed, growing old, presented them to his son; but the son grew
not old in the armour of his father.

But when cloud-compelling Jove beheld him apart, accoutred in the
armour of divine Pelides, then shaking his head, he said to his own
soul:

"Ah! luckless one; nor is death at all in thy thoughts, which is now
near thee; but thou puttest on the immortal armour of the bravest hero,
at whom others also tremble; and thou hast slain his companion, both
gentle and brave, and thou hast taken the armour from his head and
shoulders not according to propriety. But now will I give into thy hands
a great victory, a compensation for this, that Andromache shall never
receive from thee, having returned from the battle, the illustrious arms
of the son of Peleus."

The son of Saturn spoke, and moreover nodded with his sable brows. But
the armour fitted the person of Hector, and Mars, the dreadful warrior,
entered him. And his limbs were inwardly filled with might and strength,
and he went after the illustrious allies, exclaiming aloud; and
glittering in his armour, to all of them he presented the appearance of
the magnanimous son of Peleus. But going among them, he animated each
with his words,--Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, and Thersilochus, Asteropæus,
Disenor, and Hippothoüs, Phorcys, Chromius, and Ennomus the augur.
Exhorting these, he spoke winged words:

"Hear, ye countless troops of allies dwelling around, for I did not
assemble you here, each from his own city, seeking or wanting a crowd,
but that ye might willingly defend for me the wives and infant children
of the Trojans from the warlike Greeks. Thinking these things, I wear
away my people by gifts and provisions [to you], and I satisfy the
desire of each of you. Wherefore now let some one, being turned round
straight, either perish or be saved; for these are the chances of
war.[552] Nevertheless, whoever will drag Patroclus, although dead, to
the horse-breaking Trojans, and to whom Ajax shall yield, [to him] will
I present one-half of the spoils, but I myself will keep the other half;
and glory shall be to him as much as to me."

Thus he spoke; but they, lifting up their spears, advanced with
condensed might[553] direct against the Greeks; and their mind eagerly
hoped to draw away the dead body from Telamonian Ajax:--fools! truly
over it he took away the life from many. And then Ajax addressed
Menelaus, good in the din of war:

   [Footnote 552: See Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 97.]

   [Footnote 553: Schol.: Στίφος ποιήσαντες, συνασπίσαντες, εἰς τὸ
   αύτὸ πάντες ὁρμήσαντες. A curious interpretation is given in the
   Glossaries: "Βοίζω, _post cibum denuo impetum facio."_ See
   Alberti on Hesych. p. 766.]

"O my friend, O Jove-nurtured Menelaus, no longer do I expect that even
we ourselves will return from battle. Nor do I fear so much about the
dead body of Patroclus, which will quickly satiate the dogs and birds of
the Trojans, as much as I fear for my own head, lest it suffer anything,
and for thine, for Hector, that cloud of war, overshadows all things;
whilst to us, on the other hand, utter destruction appears. But come,
call the bravest of the Greeks, if any one will hear."

Thus he spoke; nor did Menelaus, good in the din of war, disobey; but he
shouted, crying with a loud voice to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders and chieftains of the Greeks, ye who with Agamemnon,
the son of Atreus, and Menelaus, drink the public wine,[554] and command
each his forces; but honour and glory follows from Jove. Difficult would
it be for me to look to each of the leaders, for so great a strife of
battle burns. But let some one advance, and let him be indignant in his
mind, that Patroclus should become a sport to Trojan dogs."

   [Footnote 554: _I.e._ who are supplied from the public
   resources,--τὰ ἐκ τῶν κοινῶν καὶ δημοσίων χρημάτων χορηγούμενα
   τοῖς βασιλεῦσι.--Schol.]

Thus he spoke; but quickly the swift Oïlean Ajax heard, and first
advanced opposite, running through the battle; after him Idomeneus, and
Meriones, the armour-bearer of Idomeneus, equal to man-slaughtering
Mars. But who in his mind could recount the names of the others as many
as afterwards aroused the battle of the Greeks? But the Trojans, in
close array, first made the onset, and Hector led them on.

But as when, at the mouths[555] of a river flowing from Jove, the great
wave roars against the stream, while around the lofty shores resound,
the wave being ejected [upon the beach], with so loud a clamour did the
Trojans advance: but the Greeks stood round the son of Menœtius, having
one spirit, protected by their brazen shields; whilst over their
shining helmets the son of Saturn poured a thick haze; for he did not
formerly hate the son of Menœtius when, being alive, he was the
attendant of Achilles, therefore he was loth that he should become a
prey to the Trojan dogs of the enemy; and so he excited his companions
to defend him. The Trojans, however, first dislodged the dark-eyed
Greeks, and they, leaving the dead body, retreated; nor did the
magnanimous Trojans slay any of them with their spears, although
desirous, but drew off the body. But the Greeks were about to be absent
from him a very short while, for very quickly did Ajax rally them, who,
next to the renowned son of Peleus, excelled the other Greeks in beauty
and in deeds. And he broke through the front ranks, resembling a wild
boar in strength, which amongst the mountains easily disperses the dogs
and blooming youths through the woods, turning to bay; so the son of
illustrious Telamon, noble Ajax, having made the attack, easily routed
the phalanxes of the Trojans who had surrounded Patroclus, and mostly
expected to drag him to their city, and bear away glory. Meanwhile
Hippothous, the illustrious son of Pelasgian Lethus, was dragging him by
the foot through the violent conflict, having bound him with a strap at
the ancle round the tendons, gratifying Hector and the Trojans. But soon
came evil upon him, which no one, even of those desiring it, averted
from him. Him the son of Telamon, rushing through the crowd, smote in
close fight through the brazen-cheeked helmet. The horse-haired helmet
was cleft by the point of the weapon, stricken by the great spear and
strong hand; and the brain, bloody, gushed out of the wound at the cone
of the helmet;[556] and his strength was there relaxed. Then he let fall
from his hands the foot of magnanimous Patroclus, to lie upon the earth,
and near him he himself fell, prone upon the dead body, far away from
fertile Larissa: nor did he repay the debt of nourishment to his beloved
parents, for his life was short, subdued by the spear of magnanimous
Ajax. But Hector again aimed at Ajax with his shining spear; he,
however, seeing it opposite, avoided the brazen spear by a little; but
he struck Schedius, the magnanimous son of Iphitus, by far the bravest
of the Phoceans, who inhabited dwellings in renowned Panopëus, ruling
over many men. Him he smote under the middle of the clavicle, and the
brazen point of the weapon went quite through, near the extremity of the
shoulder. Falling, he made a crash, and his arms rang upon him. Then
Ajax again smote warlike Phorcys, the son of Phænops, in the middle of
the belly, while defending Hippothous. And he broke the cavity of the
corslet, and the brazen weapon drank his entrails through; and falling
in the dust, he seized the earth with the palm of his hand. The foremost
warriors and illustrious Hector retreated; but the Greeks shouted
loudly, and drew off the bodies, both Phorcys and Hippothous, and they
loosed the armour from their shoulders.

   [Footnote 555: Schol. Apoll. Rhod. i. 11: Τῶν ποταμῶν οἱ
   συμβάλλοντες τόποι τῇ θαλάσσῃ, προχοαὶ λέγονται, where he quotes
   this instance from Homer.]

   [Footnote 556: See iii. 372, "the part of the helmet in which the
   crest was inserted--unless αἰλὸν be taken metaphorically, and by
   παρ' αὐλὸν be meant the _stream_ of blood, as from a
   pipe."--Oxford Transl.]

Then again would the Trojans, [routed] by the warlike Greeks, have gone
up to Ilium, subdued through cowardice; but the Argives on their part,
by their valour and might, would have obtained glory, even contrary to
the destined will of Jove, had not Apollo himself excited Æneas, in body
like unto Periphas the herald, son of Epytis, who knowing prudent
counsels in his mind, had grown old, as a herald, with his aged sire.
Assimilating himself to him, Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed him:

"O Æneas, how could ye preserve lofty Ilium against the deity, since I
behold these other men relying on their bravery, and might, and valour,
and their number, and possessing a dauntless host? Yet Jove wills the
victory to us, rather than to the Danai; yet ye greatly tremble, nor
fight."

Thus he spoke; but Æneas, seeing him before him, recognized far-darting
Apollo; and loudly shouting, addressed Hector:

"O Hector, and ye other leaders of the Trojans and allies, this now
indeed is a shame, that we, subdued by cowardice, should go up to Ilium,
[driven] by the warlike Achæans. For already even now some one of the
gods, having stood near to me, declared that Jove, the highest
counsellor, is an ally of the battle [to us]. Wherefore let us go direct
against the Greeks, nor let them quietly move the dead Patroclus to the
ships."

Thus he spoke, and then springing forth, stood far before the front
ranks. But they rallied, and stood opposed to the Greeks. Then Æneas
wounded with his spear Leocritus, son of Arisbas, the brave companion of
Lycomedes. Him falling, warlike Lycomedes pitied, and advancing very
near, he stood, and hurled with his shining spear, and struck Apisaon,
the son of Hippasis, shepherd of the people, in the liver, beneath the
diaphragm, and immediately relaxed his limbs. He had come from fertile
Pæonia, and next to Asteropæus, was the bravest to fight. Warlike
Asteropæus pitied him-fallen, and he rushed forward, willing to fight
with the Greeks. But not yet could he [do so], for [those] standing
around Patroclus were fenced in on every side with shields, and held
their spears before them; for Ajax went eagerly among all, greatly
cheering them on. He suffered not any one either to retire from the
body, nor any of the Greeks to fight in front, excelling the others, but
vigorously to stalk around for defence, and to combat in close fight.
Thus did mighty Ajax command; but the earth was moistened with purple
gore, whilst upon each other fell the dead bodies of the Trojans and
courageous allies, and of the Greeks; for neither did they fight
bloodlessly, although far fewer perished, because they were ever mindful
throughout the tumult to repel severe labour from each other.

Thus indeed they fought, like a fire; nor would you say that the Sun was
safe, or the Moon, for they were wrapt in dark haze in the combat, as
many of the bravest as stood around the dead son of Menœtius. The other
Trojans and well-armed Greeks, however, fought at ease[557] beneath the
atmosphere; the piercing splendour of the sun was expanded over them,
and a cloud did not appear over all the earth, nor the mountains.
Resting at intervals, they fought, avoiding the cruel weapons of each
other, standing far asunder; whilst those in the middle suffered
hardships from darkness and from war, and were afflicted by the ruthless
brass, as many as were most brave. But two heroes, illustrious men,
Thrasymedes and Antilochus, had not yet heard that blameless Patroclus
was dead; but thought that, still alive, he was fighting with the
Trojans in the foremost tumult. But these, watching the slaughter and
flight of their companions, fought apart, since Nestor had so ordered,
urging [them] on to battle from the black ships. But to these all day a
mighty contest of severe strife arose, and ever incessantly the knees,
the legs, and the feet of each under him, the hands and the eyes of
those fighting around the brave companion of swift-footed Æacides, were
defiled with fatigue and perspiration. And as when a man gives the hide
of a huge ox, saturated with grease, to his people to stretch, but they,
having received, stretch it, standing apart from each other in a circle,
and straightway the moisture exudes, and the oily matter enters, many
pulling it, till it is stretched in every direction; so they, on both
sides, dragged the body here and there in a small space; for the mind of
the Trojans, on the one hand, eagerly hoped to draw him to Ilium, but of
the Greeks, on the other, to the hollow ships. Around him arose a fierce
tumult; nor could Mars, the exciter of troops, nor Minerva, having
beheld it, have found fault, not even if wrath had particularly come
upon her; such an evil labour of men and horses did Jove extend over
Patroclus on that day. Nor as yet did noble Achilles at all know that
Patroclus was dead, because they fought far from the swift ships,
beneath the wall of the Trojans. He never thought in his mind that he
was dead; but that alive, having approached the gates, he would return
back, since he did not at all suppose that he could sack the city
without him, for he had often heard this from his mother, hearing it
apart, who used to tell him the design of mighty Jove. Yet his mother
had not then told him so great an evil as had happened, that the
companion by far most dear to him had perished.

   [Footnote 557: _I.e._ resting at intervals, as it is explained in
   ver. 373.]

But they, ever around the dead body, holding their sharp spears, charged
incessantly, and slaughtered one another, and thus would some of the
brazen-mailed Greeks say:

"O friends, surely it will not be honourable for us to retreat to the
hollow ships; but [rather] let the black earth here gape for all. This
indeed would at once be better for us, than that we should permit the
horse-breaking Trojans to drag him to their city, and obtain glory."

And thus also would some one of the magnanimous Trojans say:

"O friends, although it be our destiny that all be equally subdued
beside this man, never let any one retire from the battle."

Thus, then, some one said, and aroused the spirit of each. Thus indeed
were they fighting; and the iron clangour[558] reached the brazen heaven
through the unfruitful air. But the horses of Æacides being apart from
the combat, wept, when first they perceived that their charioteer had
fallen in the dust, beneath man-slaughtering Hector. Automedon, indeed,
the brave son of Diores, frequently urged them on, beating them with the
sharp lash, and frequently addressed them in mild terms and in threats;
but they chose neither to go back to the ships towards the wide
Hellespont nor into the battle among the Greeks; but, as a pillar
remains firm, which stands at the tomb of a dead man or woman, so they
remained detaining the splendid chariot motionless, and drooping their
heads to the earth. But warm tears[559] flowed from their eyelids to the
earth, complaining from desire of their charioteer; and their thick mane
was defiled, flowing down on both sides from the collar at the yoke. But
the son of Saturn beholding them lamenting, felt compassion, and shaking
his head, communed with his own mind:

"Ah! luckless pair, why did we give you to king Peleus, a mortal; for ye
are free from old age, and immortal? Was it that ye might endure griefs
with unhappy men? For there is not anything at all more wretched than
man,[560] of all, as many as breathe and move over the earth. But
Hector, the son of Priam, shall not be borne by you, even in the
curiously-wrought chariot, for I will not permit it. Is it not enough
that he both possesses those arms, and vainly boasts? But into your
knees and spirit will I cast vigour, that ye may safely bear Automedon
from the battle to the hollow ships; for still will I give glory to them
(the Trojans), to slay, until they reach the well-benched ships, till
the sun set, and sacred darkness come on."

   [Footnote 558: Clarke compares Æn. xii. 284, from Ennius, apud
   Macrob. vi. 1: "Hastati spargunt hastas, fit ferreus imber." See
   Columna's notes. p. 82, ed. Hessel. The Scholiast rather
   interprets it, of a strong and violent shout, στερεὸς καὶ πολὺ
   ἰσχυρός.]

   [Footnote 559: See Virg. Æn. xi. 89, sqq. with Servius, Quintus
   Calab. iii. 740: Ούδὲ μιν ἄμβροτοι ἵπποι ἀταρβέος Αἰακίδαο Μίμνον
   ἀδάκρυτοι παρὰ νήεσιν' ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτοὶ Μύροντο σφετέροιο
   δαϊκταμένου βασιλῆος. Οὐδ' ἔθελον μογεροῖσιν ἔτ' ἀνδράσιν, οὐδὲ
   μεθ' ἵπποις Μίσγεσθ' Ἀργείων, ὀλοὸν περὶ πένθος ἔχοντες.]

   [Footnote 560: On this comfortable and satisfactory sentiment,
   see the lugubrious collection of parallel passages in Duport, p.
   98.]

So saying, he breathed strong vigour into the steeds; and they, shaking
the dust from their manes to the ground, quickly bore the rapid car
amongst the Trojans and Greeks. And against them[561] fought Automedon,
though grieved for his companion, rushing along in his chariot like a
vulture among the geese. For he fled easily from the tumult of the
Trojans, and easily did he rush on, pursuing through the dense throng.
Yet did he not slay the men when he pressed onward to pursue; for it was
by no means possible for him, being alone in the sacred[562] car, to
assault with the spear and to rein in the fleet steeds. At length,
however, a companion, the hero Alcimedon, son of Laërceus, the son of
Æmon, beheld him with his eyes, and stood behind his chariot, and
addressed Automedon:

   [Footnote 561: The Trojans.]

   [Footnote 562: _I.e._ splendid, of surpassing workmanship. Others
   refer the epithet to the divine gift mentioned in ver. 443, to
   the fabrication of the chariot by the god Vulcan, or to the
   origin of Achilles himself from a goddess.]

"Which of the gods, O Automedon, has placed a foolish counsel in thy
bosom, and taken from thee sound judgment; inasmuch as alone thou
fightest in the foremost ranks with the Trojans? Thy companion indeed is
slain; and Hector himself vaunts, having upon his shoulders the armour
of Æacides."

Him then Automedon, the son of Diores, addressed:

"Alcimedon, what other of the Greeks, then, is like thee, to subdue and
restrain the spirit of immortal steeds, unless Patroclus, whilst alive,
a counsellor equal to the gods? Now, however, death and fate possess
him. Nevertheless, do thou take the lash and beautiful reins; but I will
descend from the chariot, that I may fight." [563]

   [Footnote 563: Alcimedon in this address condemns the imprudence
   of his friend, who, in this moment of imminent danger, takes upon
   him the joint offices of warrior (παραβάτης) and charioteer
   (ἡνίοχος).]

Thus he spoke, but Alcimedon, ascending the chariot, swift in war,
instantly took in his hands the lash and reins, whilst Automedon leaped
down; but illustrious Hector perceived this, and immediately addressed
Æneas, being near:

"Æneas, counsellor of the brazen-mailed Trojans, I have observed these
two steeds of Achilles proceeding through the battle with unskilful
charioteers. I therefore may hope to capture them, if thou, at least,
desire it in thy mind; for standing opposite, they will not dare to
withstand us, rushing on to fight in battle."

Thus he spoke; nor did the brave son of Anchises disobey. Both advanced
direct, covered as to their shoulders with bulls' hides, dry, thick; and
upon them much brass was plated. But along with them went both Chromius
and god-like Aretus: and their mind greatly hoped to slay them, and to
drive away the long-necked steeds. Foolish,[564] for they were not
destined to return back bloodlessly from Automedon, for he, having
prayed to father Jove, was filled with fortitude and valour, as to his
dark mind, and immediately addressed Alcimedon, his faithful comrade:

   [Footnote 564: Cf. Æn. x. 501, sqq. So Milton, P.L. ix. 404:--

       "O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
       Of thy presumed return! event perverse!"]

"O Alcimedon, do not now detain the steeds far from me; but [keep them]
breathing closely at my back; for I do not think that Hector, the son of
Priam, will abstain from violence, before that he has mounted the
beautiful-maned horses of Achilles, having slain both of us, and put to
rout the ranks of Grecian heroes; or himself be slain among the first."

Thus saying, he called upon the Ajaces, and Menelaus: "Ye Ajaces,
leaders of the Greeks, and Menelaus, leave then the dead body to those,
as many as are bravest, to defend it on all sides, and to repulse the
ranks of men; but from us who are alive avert the merciless day. For
hither violently rush through the lamentable fight Hector and Æneas, who
are the best of the Trojans. But all these things rest upon the knees of
the gods; for I also will hurl, and all these things will be a care to
Jove."

He said; and, brandishing, hurled his long-shadowed spear, and struck
upon the shield of Aretus, equal on all sides; it however did not repel
the spear, but the brass went entirely through, and passed through the
belt into the bottom of his belly. And as when a man in youthful vigour,
holding a sharp axe, cuts through the whole tendon, striking behind the
horns of a wild bull; but it, leaping forward, falls; so he, springing
forward, fell supine; and the sharp spear, quivering in his entrails,
relaxed his limbs. Then Hector took aim at Automedon with his shining
spear, but he, seeing it in front of him, avoided the brazen weapon; for
he bent forward. But the long spear was fixed in the ground behind him;
and moreover the nether end of the spear was shaken; but there then the
strong weapon spent its force. Then truly they would have engaged hand
to hand with their swords, had not the eager Ajaces, who came through
the crowd, at the call of their companion, separated them. But Hector,
Æneas, and godlike Chromius, greatly dreading them, retired back again,
and left Aretus lying there, lacerated as to his heart; but him
Automedon, equal to swift Mars, despoiled of his armour, and, boasting,
uttered this speech:

"Surely now I have a little relieved my heart of sorrow for the dead son
of Menœtius, although having slain but an inferior man."

Thus having spoken, seizing the gore-stained spoils, he placed them in
the chariot, and mounted himself, bloody as to his feet and hands above,
like some lion which has fed upon a bull. Again over Patroclus was the
direful battle extended, grievous, lamentable; and Minerva excited the
contention, descending from heaven; for far-sounding Jove sent her forth
to encourage the Greeks, as his intention was now changed. As Jove
extends a purple rainbow from heaven to mortals, to be a signal either
of war, or of a chilling storm, which causes men to cease from their
works upon the earth, and afflicts the cattle; so she, having obscured
herself in a purple cloud, entered the army of the Greeks, and aroused
every man. First, however, she addressed the son of Atreus, gallant
Menelaus, inciting him, for he was near her, assimilating herself, in
her form and unwearied voice, to Phœnix:

"Thine, of a truth, will shame and disgrace now be, O Menelaus, if the
swift dogs tear the faithful companion of illustrious Achilles beneath
the wall of the Trojans; therefore bravely hold on, and urge on all the
people." Whom, in return, Menelaus, good in the din of war, addressed:
"Phœnix, father, old man long since born, would that Minerva would give
me strength, and ward off the force of the weapons. Then indeed would I
be willing to stand by and defend Patroclus; for dying, he greatly
affected my mind with grief. But Hector has the dreadful force of fire,
nor does he cease slaying with his spear; for to him Jove affords
glory."

Thus he spoke; but the azure-eyed goddess Minerva rejoiced, because to
her he had prayed first of all the gods. But in his shoulders and knees
she put strength, and placed in his bosom the boldness of a fly, which,
although frequently driven away from a human body, persists in
biting,--and the blood of man is sweet to it. With such confidence she
filled his dark soul: and he advanced towards Patroclus, and took aim
with his splendid spear. Now there was among the Trojans one Podes, the
son of Eëtion, rich and brave; whom of his people Hector chiefly
honoured, for he was his dear companion in the banquet. Him
yellow-haired Menelaus smote upon the belt while hastening to flight,
and drove the brazen weapon quite through. He, falling, gave a crash,
and Menelaus, the son of Atreus, dragged away the body from the Trojans
to the crowd of his companions. But Apollo, standing near, excited
Hector in the likeness of Phœnops, son of Asias, who, inhabiting
dwellings at Abydos, was most dear to him of all his guests.
Assimilating himself to him, far-darting Apollo spoke:

"Hector, what other of the Greeks will any more fear thee, since now
thou dreadest Menelaus, who indeed before was but an effeminate warrior,
but now departs done, bearing off the dead corse from the Trojans? He
has slain, in the front ranks, Podes, the son of Eëtion, thy comrade,
faithful and brave."

Thus he spoke; but him a dark cloud of grief overshadowed, and he went
through the front ranks, armed in glittering brass. And then the son of
Saturn took his ægis, fringed and splendid, and covered Ida with clouds;
but having flashed his lightning, he thundered very loudly, and shook it
(the mountain); and (he) gave victory to the Trojans, but put the Greeks
to flight.

Peneleus, the Bœotian, first was leader of the flight; for he was
wounded slightly[565] on the tip of the shoulder with a spear, being
always turned frontwards; but the spear of Polydamas grazed even to the
bone, for he, coming close, had wounded him. Next Hector wounded Leïtus,
son of magnanimous Alectryon, on the hand at the wrist, and caused him
to cease from battle. Then looking around him, he trembled, since he no
longer hoped in his mind [to be able] to fight with the Trojans, holding
his spear in his hand. But Idomeneus had struck, on the corslet, upon
the breast near the pap, Hector rushing after Leïtus: the long spear,
however, was broken at the socket; and the Trojans shouted. But he
[Hector] discharged his javelin at Idomeneus, the son of Deucalion, as
he was standing in his car: him he missed by a little, but struck
Coeranus, the attendant and charioteer of Meriones, who had followed him
from well-situated Lyctus. For at first on foot, having left his
equally-plied ships, he came, and would have secured a decided victory
to the Trojans, had not Coeranus quickly driven on his swift-footed
steeds: to him then he (Coeranus) came as a help, and warded off the
merciless day; but he himself lost his life beneath man-slaughtering
Hector. Him he smote beneath the jaw-bone and ear, and the extremity of
the spear forced out his teeth and cut through the middle of his tongue.
He fell from his chariot, and the reins dropped to the ground; and
Meriones, stooping, lifted them from the plain in his own hands, and
addressed Idomeneus:

"Lash on, now, until thou reach the swift ships; for even thou thyself
perceivest that victory is no longer on the side of the Achæans."

   [Footnote 565: Ἐπιλίγδην, _on the surface_, δι'
   ἐπιπολῆς·--Kennedy.]

Thus he spake; and Idomeneus lashed on the beautiful-maned steeds to the
hollow ships; for fear now seized his mind.

Nor did Jove escape notice of magnanimous Ajax and Menelaus, when he for
the present gave the dubious victory to the Trojans; but to them the
mighty Ajax, son of Telamon, began to speak:

"Alas! even he who is very stupid might now know that father Jove
himself is aiding the Trojans; for the weapons of them all take effect,
whoever may throw them, whether coward or brave man. Jove certainly
directs them all. But the weapons of all of us fall to the earth in
vain. Come, however, let us devise the best plan, both how we may drag
off the corse, and how we ourselves may be a source of joy to our
beloved comrades, having returned home. They, of a truth, beholding us
here, are grieved, and think that we shall no longer resist the might
and invincible hands of man-slaughtering Hector. But, would there were
some companion who would quickly bring word to Achilles, since I think
he has not yet heard the mournful tidings, that his dear comrade has
died. But nowhere can I see such a person among the Greeks, for they and
their steeds are together enveloped in darkness. O father Jove, liberate
at least the sons of the Greeks from darkness; make a clear atmosphere,
and grant us to see with our eyes; then destroy us in the light,[566] if
thus it be pleasing to thee."

   [Footnote 566: A prayer well worthy of Ajax. Ammian. Marcell.
   xxviii.: "Per horrorem tenebrarum--quo tempore hebetari solent
   obstrictæ terroribus mentes; ut inter innumera multa Ajax quoque
   Homericus docet, optans perire potius luce, quam pati formidinis
   augmenta nocturnæ." Cf. Longin. ix.]

Thus he spoke; but the Sire felt compassion for him weeping, and
immediately dissipated the haze, and removed the cloud. And the sun
shone forth, and the whole battle was displayed, and then Ajax addressed
Menelaus, good in the din of war:

"Look around now, O Jove-nurtured Menelaus, if anywhere thou canst
perceive, yet alive, Antilochus, the son of magnanimous Nestor. Urge
him, going speedily, to tell to warlike Achilles, that the comrade, by
far most dear to him, has perished."

Thus he spoke; nor did Menelaus, good in the din of war, disobey. But he
hastened to go, like some lion from a fold, which after that he is
fatigued, harassing both dogs and men, who watching all night, suffer
him not to carry off the fat of the oxen; but he, desirous of flesh,
rushes on, but nothing profits; for many javelins fly against him from
daring hands, and blazing torches, which, eager as he is, he dreads; but
early in the morning he goes apart with saddened mind. So, most
unwilling, from Patroclus went Menelaus, brave in the din of war;
because he greatly feared lest the Greeks, through grievous terror,
should leave him a prey to the enemy. And much, therefore, he exhorted
Meriones and the Ajaces:

"Ye Ajaces, leaders of the Greeks, and Meriones, now let each one be
mindful of the gentleness of wretched Patroclus; for when alive, he knew
how to be mild to all; but now, indeed, Death and Fate overtake him."

Thus then having spoken, yellow-haired Menelaus departed, gazing round
in all directions, like an eagle, which, they say, sees most acutely of
birds beneath the sky, and which, though being aloft, the swift-footed
hare does not escape, when lying beneath the dense-foliaged thicket; but
he pounces upon it, and quickly seizing it, deprives it of life. Thus, O
Jove-nurtured Menelaus, were thy shining eyes turned round in all
directions through the band of thy numerous companions, if anywhere thou
mightst behold the son of Nestor, yet living. But him he very soon
perceived upon the left of all the battle, encouraging his companions,
and inciting them to fight; and standing near, yellow-haired Menelaus
addressed [him]:

"Ho! hither come, Antilochus, Jove-nurtured, that thou mayest hear the
sad message which--would that it had not happened. I think, indeed, that
thou thyself looking, perceivest that a god rolls disaster upon the
Greeks, but that victory is on the side of the Trojans; for Patroclus,
the bravest of the Greeks, is slain; and a great longing [after him] has
befallen the Greeks. But do thou quickly tell it to Achilles, running to
the ships of the Greeks, if perchance quickly he may bring in safety to
his ships the unarmed body; for crest-tossing Hector possesses the
armour."

Thus he spoke; but Antilochus shuddered, hearing the news; and long did
a want of words possess him; and his eyes were filled with tears, and
his liquid voice was interrupted. Yet not even thus did he neglect the
command of Menelaus; but he hastened to run, and gave his armour to
Laodocus, his blameless companion, who, near him, managed the
solid-hoofed steeds. Him, however, his feet bore, weeping, from the
battle, about to communicate the evil news to Achilles, son of Peleus.

Nor, O Jove-nurtured Menelaus, was thy mind willing to aid the harassed
comrades, in the place whence Antilochus had departed, and great longing
after him was caused to the Pylians; but to them he sent noble
Thrasymedes, and he himself went again towards the hero Patroclus; but
arriving, he stood beside the Ajaces, and immediately addressed them:

"Him, indeed, I have now despatched to the swift ships, to go to
swift-footed Achilles: yet I do not think that he will come, although
greatly enraged with noble Hector; for being unarmed, he could by no
means fight with the Trojans. Let even us then ourselves deliberate upon
the best plan, as well how we shall draw off the body, as also how we
ourselves may escape Death and Fate from the clamour of the Trojans."

But him mighty Telamonian Ajax then answered:

"All things correctly hast thou spoken, O illustrious Menelaus. But do
thou, and Meriones, stooping quickly under it, having lifted it up, bear
the body from the fight; whilst we two of like name, possessing equal
courage, will fight with the Trojans and with noble Hector, we who even
formerly have sustained the sharp conflict, remaining by each other."

Thus he spoke; but they with great exertion lifted up the body in their
arms from the ground: but the Trojan army shouted in their rear when
they saw the Greeks raising up the dead body, and rushed on like dogs,
which spring upon a wounded boar, before the youthful hunters. One while
indeed they run, eager to tear him asunder, but again, when he turns
upon them, relying on his strength, then they retreat, and fly in
different directions hither and thither: so the Trojans sometimes
steadily pursued in a body, striking with their swords and two-edged
spears; but when again the Ajaces, turning round upon them, stood, then
was their colour changed, nor dared any one, rushing forward, to combat
for the corpse.

Thus they with alacrity bore the body from the fight towards the hollow
ships; but the fierce battle was extended to them like a flame, which
assailing, [and] being suddenly excited, sets fire to a city of men, and
the houses diminish in the mighty blaze; whilst the force of the wind
roars through it: so a horrid tumult of steeds and warlike heroes
followed them departing. But as mules, exerting vast strength,[567] drag
from a mountain along a rugged path either a beam or a large piece of
timber for ship-building, but the spirit within them, as they hasten, is
wearied equally with fatigue and perspiration; so they with alacrity
bore away the body, whilst the Ajaces behind them checked [the enemy];
as a barrier of wood, stretched straight across a plain, restrains
water; which checks the furious courses even of rapid rivers, and
immediately turning them, directs the streams of all into the plain; nor
can they at all burst through it, though flowing with violence. So the
Ajaces in the rear always repulsed the attack of the Trojans, who,
however, followed along with them; but two amongst them in particular,
Æneas, son of Anchises, and illustrious Hector. And as a cloud of
starlings or jackdaws, shrilly chattering,[568] flies away when they
perceive a hawk advancing, which brings death to small birds; so then
from Æneas and Hector departed the sons of the Greeks, loudly
clamouring, and were forgetful of the fight. And much beautiful armour
of the flying Greeks fell both in and about the trench; but there was no
cessation from the battle.

   [Footnote 567: Literally, "girding themselves with strength."]

   [Footnote 568: Or, "shouting in presage of their doom," as Heyne
   and Kennedy would take it, a meaning borne out by προΐδωσιν. Cf.
   Longus. Past. ii. 12: Οἱ κωμῆται ταραχθέντες, ἐπιπήδωσιν αὐτοῖς
   ὡσεὶ ψᾶρες, ἢ κολο οί.]




                         BOOK THE EIGHTEENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Thetis comforts her son for the death of Patroclus, and promises to
procure him new armour from Vulcan. At the command of Juno, Achilles
comes forth and strikes terror into the enemy. The body of Patroclus is
rescued, and prepared for funeral rites, and Vulcan forges a suit of
armour and a splendid shield for Achilles.


Thus they, then,[569] were fighting, like a blazing fire; but
swift-footed Antilochus came as a messenger to Achilles. Him he found in
front of his lofty-prowed ships, revolving in his mind those things
which had already been accomplished; and then groaning, he communed with
his own mind:

   [Footnote 569: This is to be taken in connection with ver. 148 of
   the last book, as the regular narrative is interrupted by the
   message of Antilochus and the grief of Achilles.]

"Ah me! why are the long-haired Achæans driven back in confusion to the
ships, routed through the plain? [I fear] lest the gods have
accomplished evil sorrows to my soul, as my mother once informed me, and
told me that the bravest of the Myrmidons, I being yet alive, would
leave the light of the sun, by the hands of the Trojans. Too surely now
the valiant son of Menœtius is dead,--obstinate one! certainly I
desired him, having repelled the hostile fire, to return to the ships,
nor to fight bravely with Hector."

Whilst he was revolving these things in his mind and in his soul, in the
meantime the son of illustrious Nestor drew near, shedding warm tears,
and delivered his sad message:

"Alas! O son of warlike Peleus, surely thou wilt hear a very grievous
message, which--would that it had not taken place. Patroclus lies low;
and around his unarmed corse they are now fighting, whilst crest-tossing
Hector possesses his armour."

Thus he spoke; but him a black cloud of grief overshadowed, and taking
the burnt ashes with both hands, he poured them on his head, and denied
his comely countenance; but the dark ashes everywhere adhered to his
rich[570] tunic. But he, mighty, lay extended at great length in the
dust, and tearing, he disordered his hair with his hands. The handmaids,
whom Achilles and Patroclus had taken, grieved in their souls, shrieked
aloud, and ran out of the door round warlike Achilles; and all smote
their breasts with their hands,[571] and the limbs of each were relaxed.
Antilochus, on the other side, lamented, shedding tears, holding the
hands of Achilles; (and he kept groaning within his generous heart,) for
he feared lest he should cut his throat with his sword. Then he moaned
dreadfully, and his venerable mother heard him, sitting in the depths of
the sea, beside her aged father, and immediately lamented: and all the
goddesses assembled around her, as many Nereïdes as were at the bottom
of the sea. There were Glauce, Thaleia, and Cymodoce, Nesæa, Spio, Thoa,
and large-eyed Halia, Cymothoë, Actæa, and Limnorea, Melita, Iæra,
Amphithoë, and Agave, Doto, Proto, Pherusa, and Dynamene, Dexamene,
Amphinome, and Callianira, Doris, Panope, and distinguished Galatea,
Nemertes, Apseudes, and Callianassa. There were also Clymene, Ianira,
and Ianassa, Mæra, Orithya, and fair-haired Amathea, and other Nereïdes
which were in the depths of the sea. But the resplendent cave was full
of them, and all at once they beat their breasts; but Thetis began the
lamentation:

   [Footnote 570: So νεκτάρεον ἑανόν, iii. 385.--Heyne.]

   [Footnote 571: In illustration of this custom of mourners, cf.
   Virg. Æn. i. 484:--

          "Crinibus Iliades passis, peplumque ferebant
          Suppliciter tristes, et tunsæ pectora palmis."

   Ovid, Fast. iv. 454: "Et feriunt mœstæ pectora nuda manus."
   Silius, xii. 528. Petronius, ciii. p. 509, ed. Burm.: "Sparsis
   prosequi crinibus, aut nudatum pectus plangere;" cxv.: "Percussi
   semel iterumque pectus." See Westerhov, on Ter. Hec. ii. 3, 49;
   Northmore on Tryphiodor. 34; and Blomf. on Æsch. Choeph. 27.]

"Hear, sister Nereïdes, that hearing ye may all well know what griefs
are in my mind. Woe is me wretched! woe is me who have in an evil hour
brought forth the bravest [of men], I who, after having borne a son,
blameless and valiant, the chief of heroes, and he grew up[572] like a
young tree: having reared him like a sapling in a fruitful spot of a
field, I afterwards sent him forth in the curved ships to Ilium, to
fight against the Trojans; but I shall not receive him again, having
returned home to the palace of Peleus. But whilst he lives and beholds
the light of the sun, he grieves,[573] nor can I, going to him, avail
him aught. Yet will I go, that I may see my beloved son, and hear what
grief comes upon him remaining away from the battle."

Thus having spoken, she left the cave; but they all went along with her,
weeping, and the wave of the ocean was cleft around for them.[574] But
when they reached fertile Troy, they in order ascended the shore, where
the fleet ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up round swift Achilles.
Then his venerable mother, shrilly wailing, stood near to him deeply
lamenting, and took the head of her son, and, mourning, addressed to him
winged words:

   [Footnote 572: Ἀνέδραμον is used in the same way by Herodot. vii.
   156, viii. 55; Theocrit. xviii. 29. It corresponds to our English
   phrase "to run up."]

   [Footnote 573: _I.e._ he continues to do so, and will, till his
   death.]

   [Footnote 574: Σφίσι is the dativus commodi.]

"O son, why weepest thou, and what sorrow has come upon thy mind? Speak
out, nor conceal it. Those things indeed are fulfilled for thee from
Jove, as thou didst formerly pray, lifting up thy hands--that all the
sons of the Greeks, wanting thee, should, be collected at the ships, and
suffer disgraceful deeds."

But her swift-footed Achilles addressed, deeply groaning:

"Mother mine, these things indeed the Olympian king hath accomplished
for me; but what pleasure is there in them to me, since Patroclus, my
dear companion, is dead, whom I honoured beyond all my companions,
equally with my own head? Him have I lost; and Hector, having slain him,
has stripped off his mighty armour, a wonder to be seen, beautiful;
which the other gods gave to Peleus, splendid gifts, on that day when
they laid thee in the bed of a mortal man. Would that thou hadst dwelt
there among the immortal marine inhabitants, and that Peleus had wedded
a mortal spouse. But now [thou hast been wedded, to the end] that
immeasurable grief may be upon thy mind for thy son slain, whom thou
shalt not again receive, having returned home. Since even my mind urges
me not to live nor have intercourse with men, unless Hector first lose
his life, smitten by my spear, and pay the penalty for the
slaughter[575] of Patroclus, the son of Menœtius."

But him Thetis in turn addressed, pouring forth tears: "Short-lived thou
wilt be, O my son, as thou sayest, for fate is ready for thee
immediately after Hector." Then, heavily sighing, swift-footed Achilles
addressed her: "May I die then immediately, since it was not destined
that I should aid my companion now slain; but he indeed hath perished
far away from his native land, and longed for me to be an averter of his
doom. But now[576]--since I shall not return to my dear father-land, nor
have been a preservation[577] to Patroclus, or to my other companions,
who have been subdued in great numbers by noble Hector; but sit beside
the ships, an useless weight on the earth, being such as is none of the
brazen-mailed Achæans in war, though in council there are others
superior; would that therefore contention might be extinguished from
gods and men; and anger, which is wont to impel even the very wisest to
be harsh; and which, much sweeter than distilling honey, like smoke,
rises in the breasts of men; so now did Agamemnon, king of men, enrage
me: but although greatly grieved, let us leave these things to pass by
as done, subduing, from necessity, our own spirit within our bosoms: but
now will I go, that I may find Hector, the destroyer of my dear friend,
and I will accept death whensoever Jove and the other immortal gods
shall please to accomplish it. For not even the might of Hercules
escaped death, who was very dear to king Jove, the son of Saturn; but
fate subdued him, and the grievous wrath of Juno. So also shall I lie,
when I am dead, if a similar fate be destined for me; but now may I bear
away illustrious glory, and compel some one of the Trojan women and
deep-robed Dardanians to sigh frequently, wiping away the tears from her
tender cheeks with both hands; and may they know that I have long ceased
from battle.[578] Wherefore do not hinder me from the combat, although
loving me, for thou wilt not persuade me."

   [Footnote 575: Ελώρια is the more usual form, but ἔλωρα is
   recognized by Hesychius. "If correct," Kennedy says, "it may be
   explained by the existence of ἔλωρον from ἔλωρ (Hesych. t.i. p.
   1186, from Il. v. 488), signifying the _price of slaughter_, by
   the same analogy as θρέπτρον (iv. 478) the _price of
   nutrition_."]

   [Footnote 576: Observe the long hyperbaton, resulting from the
   excitement of the speaker.]

   [Footnote 577: Literally, "light."]

   [Footnote 578: _I.e._ they shall find out the difference when I
   make my appearance]

Him then the silver-footed goddess Thetis answered: "Certainly this is
true, O son, nor is it an evil thing to avert utter destruction from our
friends when afflicted. But thy beautiful arms, brazen and shining, are
detained among the Trojans, which crest-tossing Hector himself, having
on his shoulders, boasts of: yet I suspect that he will not long glory
in them, for death is near to him. But do thou by no means enter the
slaughter of Mars before thou beholdest me with thine eyes coming
hither. For at dawn I will return with the rising sun, bearing beautiful
armour from king Vulcan."

Thus having spoken, she turned round from her son, and being turned,
addressed her marine sisters: "Enter ye now the broad bosom of the deep,
about to behold the marine old man, and the mansions of my sire, and
tell him all things; but I go to lofty Olympus, to Vulcan, the skilful
artist, to try if he is willing to give my son illustrious, glittering
armour."

Thus she spoke, but they immediately sank beneath the wave of the sea.
But Thetis, the silver-footed goddess, again departed to Olympus, that
she might bear the illustrious armour to her beloved son. Her, on the
one hand, her feet bore towards Olympus: but the Greeks, flying with a
heaven-sent uproar from man-slaughtering Hector, reached the ships and
the Hellespont. Nor had the well-greaved Greeks drawn off the dead body
of Patroclus, the attendant of Achilles, out of the reach of weapons;
for now again both infantry and cavalry pursued him, and Hector, the son
of Priam, like unto a flame in violence. Thrice did illustrious Hector
seize him behind by the feet, eager to draw him away, and loudly shouted
to the Trojans; and thrice did the two Ajaces, clad in impetuous might,
forcibly repulse him from the corse; whilst he, with steady purpose,
ever relying on his might, sometimes charged through the crowd, and
sometimes again stopped, loudly shouting; but never retreated
altogether. But as night-watching[579] shepherds are by no means able to
drive away from a carcase a tawny lion, greatly hungering; so were the
two warriors, the Ajaces, unable to drive away Hector, the son of
Priam, from the body. And now indeed would he have dragged it off, and
obtained great glory, had not fleet wind-footed Iris come as a messenger
to the son of Peleus, running down from Olympus, that he should arm
himself unknown to Jove and the other gods; for Juno sent her forth; and
standing near, she addressed to him winged words:

   [Footnote 579: Cf. Luke ii. 8, with the notes of Wetstein and
   Kypke. Although ἄγραυλοι may simply mean "dwelling in the
   fields," as in Apollon. Rh. iv. 317, it is better to follow the
   interpretation of Hesychius: Οἱ ἐν ἀγροῖς διανυκτερεύοντες. But
   cf. Alberti, t.i. p. 64.]

"Arise, son of Peleus, most terrible of all men; defend Patroclus, for
whom[580] a dire contest is maintained before the ships. But they are
slaughtering each other, the one party fighting for the slain corpse,
whilst the other, the Trojans, rush on, that they may drag him away to
wind-swept Ilium; and above all, illustrious Hector desires to seize
him, for his mind prompts him to fix his head upon stakes, having cut it
from the tender neck. But up, nor lie longer; but let reverence[581]
touch thy soul, that Patroclus should be a source of delight to Trojan
dogs. A disgrace would be to thee, if the dead body should come at all
defiled."

   [Footnote 580: _I.e._ for whose body.]

   [Footnote 581: "Σέβας is commonly rendered _pudor_, nearly
   synonymous with αἰδώς. Its meaning is however more forcible, viz.
   _esteem it as an act of impiety to abandon the body to
   insult_."--Kennedy.]

But her noble, swift-footed Achilles, then answered: "Which of the gods,
O goddess Iris, sent thee as a messenger tome?"

But him fleet, wind-footed Iris, again addressed: "Juno sent me forth,
the glorious spouse of Jove, nor does the lofty-throned son of Saturn
know it, nor any other of the immortals who inhabit snowy Olympus."

But her swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed: "And how can I go to
the slaughter? for they possess my armour. Besides, my dear mother does
not permit me to be armed, before that with my eyes I behold her
coming, for she hath promised that she will bear me beautiful armour
from Vulcan. But I indeed know not of another, whose splendid armour I
could put on,[582] except the shield of Ajax, son of Telamon."

   [Footnote 582: Ἀλλ' οὐδενὸς οἶδα ἀρμόζουτάν μοι
   πανοπλίαν.--Schol.]

"But he, I hope, mingles in the front ranks, slaying with his spear round
the head of Patroclus."

But him fleet-footed Iris again addressed: "Well too do we know that
they possess thy distinguished armour: yet even thus, going towards the
ditch, show thyself to the Trojans, if perchance the Trojans, terrified,
may desist from battle, and the warlike, harassed sons of the Greeks may
breathe again; and there be a short respite from fighting." [583]

   [Footnote 583: Cf. xv. 42.]

Thus indeed having spoken, swift-footed Iris departed; but Achilles,
dear to Jove, arose; and around his strong shoulders Minerva threw her
fringed ægis. And the divine one of goddesses crowned his head around
with a golden cloud, and from it she kindled a shining flame. And as
when smoke, ascending from a city, reaches the æther from an island afar
off, which foes invest, who [pouring out] from their city, contend all
day in hateful fight: but with the setting sun torches blaze one after
another,[584] and the splendour arises, rushing upwards, for [their]
neighbours to behold, if perchance they may come with ships, as
repellers of the war; thus did the flame from the head of Achilles reach
the sky. He stood, having advanced from the wall to the trench, nor
mingled with the Greeks, for he reverenced the prudent advice of his
mother. There standing, he shouted, and Pallas Minerva, on the other
side, vociferated, and stirred up immense tumult among the Trojans. And
as the tone is very clear, when a trumpet sounds, while deadly foes are
investing a city; so distinct then was the voice of the descendant of
Æacus. But when they heard the brazen voice of Achilles, the soul was
disturbed to all, whilst the beautiful-maned steeds turned the chariots
backwards, for they presaged sorrows in their mind. The charioteers were
panic-struck when they beheld the terrific, indefatigable flame, blazing
over the head of magnanimous Pelides; for the azure-eyed goddess Minerva
lighted it. Thrice over the trench loudly shouted noble Achilles, and
thrice were the Trojans and their illustrious allies thrown into
confusion. There then perished twelve bravest heroes by their chariots
and spears, whilst the Greeks, dragging Patroclus with joy out of the
reach of weapons, stretched him on a bier; but his beloved companions
stood round him mourning, and with them followed swift-footed Achilles,
shedding warm tears, when he beheld his faithful comrade lying upon a
bier, lacerated with the sharp brass: whom indeed he had sent forth with
his horses and chariots to battle, but did not receive him again, having
returned.

   [Footnote 584: Hesychius: ἐπήτριμοι, ἀλλεπάλληλοι. Cf. Oppian,
   Cyn. i. 321; iii. 275. The orthography ἐπίτριμοι is equally
   correct, according to Abresch.]

But the large-eyed, venerable Juno sent the unwearied sun, to return to
the flowing of the ocean, against his inclination. The sun then set, and
the noble Greeks desisted from the violent conflict, and the equally
destructive battle. The Trojans again, on the other side, retiring from
the violent combat, loosed their fleet steeds from their chariots. But
they assembled in the council before they bethought them of their
banquet. The assembly consisted of persons standing up, nor did any one
dare to sit; for fear possessed all, because Achilles had appeared, who
had long abstained from the direful combat. Among them prudent
Polydamas, the son of Panthus, began to speak, for he alone saw both the
future and the past. He was the companion of Hector, and they were born
in one night, but the one excelled in counsel, and the other greatly in
the spear. He wisely counselling, harangued them, and spoke:

"My friends, consider well on both sides; for I advise that we now
return to the city, nor await the sacred Morn in the plain near the
ships; for we are far away from the wall. As long indeed as this man was
wroth with noble Agamemnon, so long were the Greeks more easy to fight
with. For even I was delighted, passing the night by the swift barks,
expecting that we should take the equally-plied barks; but now greatly
do I fear swift-footed Pelides: so violent is his soul, nor will he be
content to remain in the plain, where usually the Trojans and Greeks in
the intervening space divide[585] the force of war, but he will combat
for the city and our wives. We will go, then, towards the city--be
persuaded by me--for so it must be. Ambrosial night at present hath made
swift-footed Pelides cease; but if, rushing forth to-morrow with his
arms, he shall find us here, then will some one know him; for gladly
will he reach sacred Ilium, whosoever shall escape: but dogs and
vultures will devour many of the Trojans. O that such [tidings] may be
far from our ears.[586] But if we be obedient to my words, although sad,
we shall have protection[587] in the assembly during the night, and the
towers and lofty gates, and the valves fitted to them, long, well
polished, fastened together, will protect the city. But to-morrow, at
early dawn, we will stand on the towers, arrayed in armour; and it would
be difficult for him, even if he should wish it, coming from the ships,
to fight with us around the wall. Back again will he go to the ships,
after he has satiated his high-necked steeds with a varied course,
driving beneath the city. But his mind will not permit him to rush
within, nor will he ever lay it waste; sooner shall the fleet dogs
devour him."

   [Footnote 585: This is expressive of the vicissitudes of the
   conflict.]

   [Footnote 586: Eἴθε δέ μοι τοῦτο οὐ μόνον μὴ ὀφθείη, ἀλλὰ μηδὲ
   ἀκουσθείη.--Schol.]

   [Footnote 587: One of the Scholiasts, however, would take σθένος
   as=στρατιὰν, i.e. we shall keep the troops in a body. But see
   Kennedy.]

Him, then, crest-tossing Hector sternly regarding, addressed:

"No longer, O Polydamas, dost thou speak these things agreeable to me,
thou who advisest us, returning, to be cooped up in the city. Are ye not
yet satiated with being shut up within the towers? Formerly indeed all
articulate-speaking men pronounced the city of Priam rich in gold and in
brass; but now have the rich treasures of our houses perished, and many
possessions have already departed to Phrygia and agreeable Mœonia, to be
sold, since mighty Jove was enraged. But at this crisis, when the son of
politic Saturn has granted me to obtain glory at the ships, and to hem
in the Greeks by the sea, no longer, foolish man, disclose these
counsels to the people: for none of the Trojans will obey; nor will I
permit them. But come, let us all obey as I shall advise. At present
take supper in your ranks throughout the army; be mindful of the watch,
and keep guard each [of you]; but whosoever of the Trojans is
particularly anxious about his possessions, collecting them together,
let him give them to the people to be publicly consumed; it is better
that any of them should enjoy them than the Greeks. But to-morrow, with
the dawn, arrayed in armour, let us excite sharp conflict at the hollow
ships, and if truly noble Achilles has arisen at the ships, it will be
the worse for him, if he wishes [to fight]: I indeed will not fly him
from the horrid-sounding battle, but will stand very obstinately against
him, whether he bear away great glory, or I bear it away. Mars [is]
common,[588] and even slays the slayer."

   [Footnote 588: See Duport, p. 104, and Clarke's note. Livy
   translates it, "communis Mars belli;" observing, "communis Mars,
   et incertus belli eventus."]

Thus Hector harangued, and the Trojans shouted in applause: foolish men,
for Pallas Minerva had taken their senses away from them. For they
assented to Hector, advising destructive things, whilst no one
[assented to] Polydamas, who advised prudent counsel. Then they took
supper through the army. But the Greeks, lamenting all night, wept over
Patroclus, but among them Pelides led the ceaseless lamentation, placing
his man-slaying hands upon the breast of his companion, very frequently
sighing; as the well-bearded lion, from whom the stag-hunter has stolen
the cubs out of the thick forest; and he is grieved, coming afterwards.
And through many valleys he goes, tracking the footsteps of the man, if
anywhere he may find him; for very keen rage possesses him. So, deeply
sighing, he addressed the Myrmidons:

"Alas! vain indeed was the promise I uttered on that day, encouraging
the hero Menœtius in our halls; for I said that I would bring back his
illustrious son to Opus, having wasted Troy, and obtained a share of the
spoil. But Jove fulfils not for men all their intentions; for it is
fated that we shall both stain with blood the same earth here in Troy;
but neither shall aged horse-driving Peleus receive me in his palaces,
returning, nor my mother Thetis, but the earth shall here hold me. Now,
however, O Patroclus! since after thee I go beneath the earth, I shall
not perform thy funeral rites, before that I bring hither the arms and
head of magnanimous Hector, thy murderer, and behead twelve illustrious
sons of the Trojans, before thy pile, enraged on account of thee slain.
Meanwhile thou shall lie thus at the crooked ships; and round thee
Trojan [dames] and deep-bosomed Dardanians shall weep and shed tears
night and day; whom we ourselves have toiled to get by our valour and
the long spear, laying waste the rich cities of articulate-speaking
men."

Thus having· spoken, noble Achilles ordered his companions to surround a
large tripod with fire, that as soon as possible they might wash away
the bloody gore from Patroclus. They then placed a bathing tripod on the
blazing fire, and poured water into it, and taking fagots, lighted them
under it. The fire indeed encircled the belly of the tripod, and the
water was warmed. But when the water boiled in the sonorous brass, then
they both washed him, and anointed him with rich oil. And they filled up
his wounds with ointment nine years old; and laying him upon a bed, they
covered him with fine linen from head to foot; and over all, with a
white mantle.[589] All night then the Myrmidons, lamenting Patroclus,
wept around swift-footed Achilles. But Jove addressed Juno, his sister
and wife:

"And at length thou hast accomplished thy object, O large-eyed,
venerable Juno, having aroused swift-fooled Achilles. Surely the
waving-crested Greeks are born from thy very self."

   [Footnote 589: Cf. Virg. Æn. vi. 218, sqq.; xi. 36, sqq. I shall
   defer discussing the heroic funeral-rites till the twenty-third
   book.]

But him large-eyed, venerable Juno then answered:

"Most imperious son of Saturn, what a word hast thou spoken? Surely now
any man who is mortal, and knows not so many designs, might accomplish
this against a man. How therefore ought not I, who boast myself to be
chief of the goddesses, both from birth and also because I am called thy
wife (and thou rulest over all the immortals), being enraged with the
Trojans, to [be able to] design evils against them."

Thus indeed they conversed with one another. But silver-footed Thetis
reached the abode of Vulcan, incorruptible, starry, remarkable amongst
the immortals, brazen, which the lame-footed himself had constructed.
Him she found sweating, exerting himself at the bellows, earnestly
working; for he was making full twenty tripods to stand around the wall
of his well-built palace. Under the base of each he placed golden
wheels, that of their own accord they might enter the heavenly council,
and again return home--a wonder to be seen. So much finish had they, but
he had not yet added the well-made handles, which he was preparing; and
he was forging the rivets. Whilst he was toiling at these things with,
skilful mind, meanwhile Thetis, the silver-footed goddess, came to him.
But the beautiful and fair-veiled Charis, whom illustrious Vulcan had
espoused, advancing, beheld her; and hung upon her hand, and addressed
her, and spoke:

"Why, O long-robed Thetis, venerable, beloved, dost thou visit our
abode? Formerly thou wast not in the habit of coming frequently.[590]
But follow farther onwards, that I may set before thee hospitable fare."

Thus having spoken, the divine of goddesses led on. Then indeed she
placed her upon a silver-studded throne, beautiful, variously wrought,
and there was a stool under her feet. But she called Vulcan, the
distinguished artist, and spoke this word:

"Come hither, Vulcan, Thetis now has need of thee."

But her illustrious Vulcan then answered: "Assuredly then an awful and
revered goddess is within, who saved me when distress came upon me,
fallen down far by the contrivance of my shameless mother, who wished to
conceal me, being lame.[591] Then should I have suffered sorrows in my
mind, had not Eurynome and Thetis received me in their bosom; Eurynome,
daughter of the refluent Ocean. With them for nine years wrought I in
brass many ingenious works of art, buckles, twisted bracelets, and
clasp-tubes, in the hollow cave; whilst round us flowed the immense
stream of Ocean, murmuring with foam: nor did any other either of gods
or mortal men know it; but Thetis and Eurynome, who preserved me, knew
it. She now comes to my house; wherefore there is need that I should
repay all the rewards of my safety to fair-haired Thetis. But set now
before her good hospitable fare, whilst I lay aside my bellows and all
my tools."

   [Footnote 590: Θαμίζειν answers to the Latin "visere,"
   "frequentare." Suidas, Θαμίζεις· πυκνάζεις, συχνάσεις. Plato,
   Rep. i. p. 410, B.: Οὐδὲ θαμίζεις ἡμῖν καταβαίνων εἰς τὸν ειραιᾶ.
   Themist. Or. v. p. 152: Μηδὲ θαμίζει δορυφοροῦσα εἰς τὰ βασίλεια.
   Philostr. Vit. Soph. i. 7, p. 254: Θαμίζων εἰς τὰ στρατόπεδα. Cf.
   Alciphron, Ep. i. 4, p. 20, iii. 5, p. 286.]

   [Footnote 591: "Hephæstos is the son of Hêrê without a father,
   and stands to her in the same relation as Athênê to Zeus: her
   pride and want of sympathy are manifested by her casting him out
   at once, in consequence of his deformity."--Grote, vol. i. p.
   79.]

He spoke and rose, a wondrous bulk,[592] from his anvil-block, limping,
and his weak legs moved actively beneath him. The bellows he laid apart
from the fire, and all the tools with which he laboured he collected
into a silver chest. With a sponge he wiped, all over, his face and both
his hands, his strong neck and shaggy breast; then put on his tunic and
seized his stout sceptre. But he went out of the doors limping, and
golden handmaids, like unto living maidens, moved briskly about the
king; and in their bosoms was prudence with understanding, and within
them was voice and strength; and they are instructed in works by the
immortal gods. These were busily occupied[593] by the king's side; but
he, hobbling along, sat down upon a splendid throne near where Thetis
was, and hung upon her hand, and spoke, and addressed her:

"Why, long-robed Thetis, venerable and dear, hast thou come to our
abode? For indeed thou didst not often come before. Make known what thou
desirest, for my mind orders me to perform it,[594] if in truth I can
perform it, and if it is to be performed."

   [Footnote 592: I have endeavoured to express Buttmann's idea
   respecting the meaning of _αἴητον_. See Lexil. p. 44-7. He
   concludes that it simply means _great_, but with a collateral
   notion of _astonishment_ implied, connecting it with ἀγητός.]

   [Footnote 593: See Buttmann, Lexil. p. 481]

   [Footnote 594: Virg. Æn. i. 80:

                      "----Tuus, ô regina, quid optes,
       Explorare labor:  mini jussa capessere fas est."]

Him then Thetis, pouring forth tears, answered: "O Vulcan, has any then,
as many as are the goddesses in Olympus, endured so many bitter griefs
in her mind, as, to me above all, Jove, the son of Saturn, has given
sorrows? Me, from among the other marine inhabitants, has he subjected
to a man, to Peleus, son of Æacus; and I have endured the couch of a man
very much against my will. He, indeed, now lies in his palaces,
afflicted with grievous old age; but now other [woes] are my lot. After
he had granted me to bring forth aud nurture a son, distinguished among
heroes, and who grew up like a plant; him having reared, as a plant in a
fertile spot of the field, I sent forth in the crooked barks to Ilium,
to fight with the Trojans; but him I shall not receive again, having
returned home to the mansion of Peleus. As long, however, as he lives to
me, and beholds the light of the sun, he suffers sorrow, nor am I, going
to him, able to avail him aught. The maid whom the sons of the Greeks
selected as a reward for him, her hath king Agamemnon taken back again
from his hands. Certainly, grieving for her, he has been wasting his
soul; whilst the Trojans were hemming in the Greeks at the ships, nor
suffered them to go beyond the gates: but the elders of the Greeks
supplicated him, and named many distinguished presents. But then he
refused to avert destruction, yet he clad Patroclus in his own armour,
and sent him forth to the battle, and he gave with him much people. All
day they fought round the Scæan gates, and certainly on that day had
overturned Troy, had not Apollo slain, among the foremost warriors, the
gallant son of Menœtius, after having done much mischief, and given
glory to Hector. On this account do I now approach thy knees, if thou
wilt give to my short-lived son a shield and helmet, and beautiful
greaves, joined with clasps, and a corslet: for what were his, his
faithful companion has lost, subdued by the Trojans; and he (Achilles)
lies upon the ground, grieving in his soul."

Her then illustrious Vulcan answered: "Take courage, nor let these
things be cause of uneasiness in thy mind; for would that I could so
surely conceal him from dread-sounding death, when grievous fate
approaches him, as that beautiful armour shall be ready for him, such as
any one of many men shall hereafter admire, whosoever may behold it."

So saying, he left her there, and went towards the bellows, which he
turned towards the fire, and commanded them to work. And full twenty
bellows blew in the furnaces, exciting a varied well-regulated[595]
blast, to be ready for him, at one time busy, at another the reverse, as
Vulcan pleased, and that the work might be complete. He cast into the
fire impenetrable brass, and tin, precious gold and silver; but next he
placed the mighty anvil on the stock, and took in [one] hand his strong
hammer, and with the other grasped the forceps.

   [Footnote 595: _I.e._ one that would either blow, or not,
   according as the progress of the work required. The student will
   do well to compare Virg. Georg. iv. 171, sqq., Æn. viii. 449,
   sqq., and Callimach. in Dian. 59, sqq.]

First of all he formed a shield,[596] both large and solid, decorating
it all over, and around it he threw a shining border, triple and
glittering, and from it [there hung] a silver belt. Of the shield
itself, there were five folds; but on it he formed many curious works,
with cunning skill. On it he wrought the earth, and the heaven, and the
sea, the unwearied sun, and the full moon. On it also [he represented]
all the constellations with which the heaven is crowned, the Pleiades,
the Hyades, and the strength of Orion, and the Bear,[597] which they
also call by the appellation of the Wain, which there revolves, and
watches Orion;[598] but it alone is free[599] from the baths of the
ocean.

   [Footnote 596: See Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 182, sqq.;
   Riccius, Dissert. Hom. t.i.p. 216; Feith, Antiq. Hom. iv. 10, 4.
   In reading this whole description, care must be taken to allow
   for the freedom of poetic description, as well as for the skill
   of the supposed artificer.]

   [Footnote 597: Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 137; Æn. i. 748, iii. 516.]

   [Footnote 598: Orion ascends above the horizon, as though in
   pursuit of the Wain, which in return seems to observe his
   movements. Manilius, i. 500: "Arctos et Orion adversis frontibus
   ibant," which is compared by Scaliger, p. 28.]

   [Footnote 599: Aratus, Dios. 48: Ἄρκτοι κυανεοῦ πεφυλαγμένοι
   ὠκεανοῖο. Virg. Georg. i. 246: "Arctos Oceani metuentes æquore
   tingi." The student of ancient astronomy will do well to compare
   Scaliger on Manil. i, p. 43, 2; Casaub. on Strabo, i. init.]

In it likewise he wrought two fair cities[600] of articulate-speaking
men. In the one, indeed, there were marriages and feasts; and they were
conducting the brides from their chambers through the city with
brilliant torches,[601] and many a bridal song[602] was raised. The
youthful dancers were wheeling round, and amongst them pipes and lyres
uttered a sound; and the women standing, each at her portals, admired.
And people were crowded together in an assembly, and there a contest had
arisen; for two men contended for the ransom-money of a slain man: the
one affirmed that he had paid all, appealing to the people; but the
other denied, [averring] that he had received nought: and both wished to
find an end [of the dispute] before a judge.[603] The people were
applauding both,--supporters of either party, and the heralds were
keeping back the people; but the elders sat upon polished stones, in a
sacred[604] circle, and [the pleaders[605]] held in their hands the
staves of the clear-voiced heralds; with these then they arose, and
alternately pleaded their cause. Moreover, in the midst lay two talents
of gold, to give to him who should best establish his claim among them.
But round the other city sat two armies of people glittering in arms;
and one of two plans was agreeable to them,[606] either to waste it, or
to divide all things into two parts,--the wealth, whatever the pleasant
city contained within it. They, however, had not yet complied, but were
secretly arming themselves for an ambuscade. Meanwhile, their beloved
wives and young children kept watch, standing above, and amongst them
the men whom old age possessed. But they (the younger men) advanced; but
Mars was their leader, and Pallas Minerva, both golden, and clad in
golden dresses, beautiful and large, along with their armour, radiant
all round, and indeed like gods; but the people were of humbler
size.[607] But when they now had reached a place where it appeared fit
to lay an ambuscade, by a river, where there was a watering-place for
all sorts of cattle, there then they settled, clad in shining steel.
There, apart from the people, sat two spies, watching when they might
perceive the sheep and crooked-horned oxen. These, however, soon
advanced, and two shepherds accompanied them, amusing themselves with
their pipes, for they had not yet perceived the stratagem. Then they,
discerning them, ran in upon them, and immediately slaughtered on all
sides the herds of oxen, and the beautiful flocks of snow-white sheep;
and slew the shepherds besides. But they, when they heard the great
tumult amongst the oxen, previously sitting in front of the
assembly,[608] mounting their nimble-footed steeds, pursued; and soon
came up with them. Then, having marshalled themselves, they fought a
battle on the banks of the river, and wounded one another with their
brazen spears. Amongst them mingled Discord and Tumult, and destructive
Fate, holding one alive, recently wounded, another unwounded, but a
third, slain, she drew by the feet through the battle; and had the
garment around her shoulders crimsoned with the gore of men.[609] But
they turned about, like living mortals, and fought, and drew away the
slaughtered bodies of each other.

   [Footnote 600: Cf. Hesiod, Scut. Herc. 270, sqq.]

   [Footnote 601: The escort took place at even-tide.]

   [Footnote 602: On the origin of this term, see Serv. on Virg. Æn.
   i. 655.]

   [Footnote 603: Or, "on the testimony of witnesses." See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 604: See Heyne on x. 56. So σέλμα σεμνὸν, "the seat of
   justice."--Æsch. Ag. 183.]

   [Footnote 605: See Kennedy, who has collected the Homeric
   passages concerning lawsuits.]

   [Footnote 606: _I.e._ the enemy. The alternative was that the
   townsmen should either surrender half their possessions, or
   submit to indiscriminate pillage. See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 607: This custom of representing gods and heroes of
   larger stature than ordinary folk prevails almost universally in
   the Egyptian monuments and sculptures.]

   [Footnote 608: "Εἴρα vel ἴρα est locus concionis, et ipse
   cœtus."--Heyns.]

   [Footnote 609: Cf. Æn. vi.: "Tisiphoneque sedens, palla succincta
   cruenta." Stat. Theb. i. 109: "Riget horrida tergo Palla, et
   cærulei redeunt in pectore nodi."]

On it he also placed a soft fallow field,[610] rich glebe, wide,
thrice-ploughed; and in it many ploughmen drove hither and thither,
turning round their teams. But when, returning, they reached the end of
the field, then a man, advancing, gave into their hands a cup of very
sweet wine; but they turned themselves in series,[611] eager to reach
the [other] end of the deep fallow. But it was all black behind, similar
to ploughed land, which indeed was a marvel beyond [all others].

On it likewise he placed a field of deep corn, where reapers were
cutting, having sharp sickles in their hands. Some handfuls fell one
after the other upon the ground along the furrow, and the binders of
sheaves tied others with bands. Three binders followed [the reapers],
whilst behind them boys gathering the handfuls, [and] bearing them in
their arms, continually supplied them; and amongst them the master stood
by the swathe[612] in silence, holding a sceptre, delighted in heart.
But apart, beneath an oak, servants were preparing a banquet, and
sacrificing a huge ox, they ministered; whilst women sprinkled much
white barley[613] [on the meat], as a supper for the reapers.

   [Footnote 610: With the whole of this description of the shield
   of Achilles, the lover of poetry should compare Milton, P.L. xi.
   638, sqq. with the remarks of Bishop Newton.]

   [Footnote 611: But Hesychius by ὄγμους understood αὔλακας, "the
   furrows." See Schneid. on Nicand. Ther. 371.]

   [Footnote 612: I here follow the Oxford translator. The term
   βασιλεὺς is well in accordance with the simple manners of the
   early ages, when kings were farmers on a large scale. Many of our
   Saviour's parables present a similar association of agriculture
   with the regal dignity.]

   [Footnote 613: Probably a religious rite. Cf. i. 449, 458.]

On it likewise he placed a vineyard, heavily laden with grapes,
beautiful, golden; but the clusters throughout were black; and it was
supported throughout by silver poles. Round it he drew an azure trench,
and about it a hedge[614] of tin; but there was only one path to it, by
which the gatherers went when they collected the vintage. Young virgins
and youths, of tender minds, bore the luscious fruit in woven
baskets,[615] in the midst of whom a boy played sweetly on a shrill
harp; and with tender voice sang gracefully to the chord; whilst they,
beating [the ground] in unison with dancing and shouts, followed,
skipping with their feet.

   [Footnote 614: Ἐφύτευσεν ἀμπελῶνα, καὶ φραγμὸν αὐτῷ περιέθηκε.
   Matt, xxi 33. See Rosemüller on Jer. v. 5.]

   [Footnote 615: "Vimineis calathis," Copa, 16. Propert. iii. 11,
   31.]

In it he also wrought a herd of oxen with horns erect. But the kine were
made of gold and of tin, and rushed out with a lowing from the stall to
the pasture, beside a murmuring stream, along the breeze-waving
reeds.[616] Four golden herdsmen accompanied the oxen, and nine dogs,
swift of foot, followed. But two terrible lions detained the bull,
roaring among the foremost oxen, and he was dragged away, loudly
bellowing, and the dogs and youths followed for a rescue. They indeed,
having torn off the skin of the great ox, lapped up his entrails and
black blood; and the shepherds vainly pressed upon them, urging on their
fleet dogs. These however refused to bite the lions, but, standing very
near, barked, and shunned them.

On it illustrious Vulcan also formed a pasture in a beautiful grove full
of white sheep, and folds, and covered huts and cottages.

Illustrious Vulcan likewise adorned it with a dance, like unto that
which, in wide Gnossus, Dædalus contrived for fair-haired Ariadne. There
danced youths and alluring[617] virgins, holding each other's hands at
the wrist. These wore fine linen robes, but those were dressed in
well-woven tunics, shining[618] as with oil; these also had beautiful
garlands, and those wore golden swords, [hanging] from silver belts.
Sometimes, with skilful feet, they nimbly bounded [round]; as when a
potter, sitting, shall make trial of a wheel fitted to his hands,
whether it will run: and at other times again they ran back to their
places through one another. But a great crowd surrounded the pleasing
dance, amusing themselves; and amongst them two tumblers, beginning
their song, spun round through the midst.

   [Footnote 616: See Knight and Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 617: Literally, "finders of oxen," i.e. so attractive
   as to be certain of receiving a good dowry, paid, after the
   ancient custom, in cattle.]

   [Footnote 618: This must have been some kind of oil-cloth, unless
   we read στίλβοντες with Kennedy. The meaning is very obscure.]

But in it he also formed the vast strength of the river Oceanus, near
the last border of the well-formed shield.

But when he had finished the shield, large and solid, he next formed for
him a corslet, brighter than the splendour of fire. He also made for him
a strong helmet, fitted to his temples, beautiful and variously
ornamented, and on it placed a golden crest; and made greaves for him of
ductile tin.

But when renowned Vulcan had with toil made all the armour, lifting it
up, he laid it before the mother of Achilles; but she, like a hawk,
darted down from snowy Olympus, bearing from Vulcan the shining armour.




                         BOOK THE NINETEENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Thetis, having brought Achilles his new armour, and promised to preserve
the body of Patroclus from corruption, he is reconciled to Agamemnon,
and being miraculously invigorated by Minerva, goes forth to battle,
regardless of the prediction of his fate by his horse Xanthus.


Saffron-robed Morn was rising from the streams of ocean, that she might
bear light to immortals and mortals;[619] but she (Thetis) came to the
ships, bearing the gifts from the god. Her dear son she found lying upon
Patroclus, bitterly lamenting, and his numerous companions were
lamenting around him. But near to him stood the divine of goddesses, and
hung upon his hand and spoke, and addressed him:

   [Footnote 619:

         "To resalute the world with sacred light
         Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews embalm'd
         The earth."--Par. Lost. xi. 132.]

"My son, let us suffer him now to lie, grieved although we be, since
first he has been laid low by the counsel of the gods: but do thou
receive these distinguished arms from Vulcan, very beautiful, such as no
man has ever worn upon his shoulders."

Having thus spoken, the goddess placed the armour before Achilles; and
they, all curiously wrought, clashed aloud. Then tremor seized all the
Myrmidons, nor did any one dare to look directly at them, but they fled
in fear. But when Achilles saw them, the more rage entered him; and his
eyes shone terribly beneath his eyelids, like a flame; and he was
delighted, holding in his hands the splendid gifts of the god. But after
he had delighted his mind, beholding these artificial works, he
immediately addressed to his mother winged words:

"Mother mine, the god hath indeed given arms, such as are fit to be
works of immortals, nor that a mortal man could make. Truly now will I
arm myself; but I very much fear lest, in the meantime, the flies,
having entered the gallant son of Menœtius, by his spear-inflicted
wounds, create maggots, and pollute the corse, (for life in it is
destroyed,) and all the parts of the body grow putrid."

But him the silver-footed goddess Thetis then answered:

"My child, let not these things be a care to thy mind. I will endeavour
to drive away from him the fierce swarms, the flies which devour heroes
slain in battle. For although he lie an entire year, his body shall
always be uncorrupted, or even better. But do thou, having summoned the
Grecian heroes to an assembly, having renounced thy wrath towards
Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people, arm thyself quickly for war, and
put on thy might."

Thus, therefore, having spoken, she infused into him the most daring
courage, and then instilled into Patroclus, through the nostrils,
ambrosia and ruby nectar,[620] that his body might be uncorrupted.

   [Footnote 620: Milton, P.L. v. 633: "with angels' food, and
   rubied nectar flows."]

But noble Achilles went along the shore of the sea, shouting fearfully,
and aroused the Grecian heroes; so that even those who used formerly to
remain in the assemblage of the ships, both those who were pilots, and
who held the rudders of the ships, and the pursers [who] were at the
ships, dispensers of food, even these then indeed went to the assembly,
because Achilles appeared, for he had long abstained from the grievous
battle. And two servants of Mars, the warlike son of Tydeus, and noble
Ulysses, went limping, leaning upon a spear; for they still had painful
wounds; and advancing, they sat in the front seats. But last came the
king of men, Agamemnon, having a wound; for him also, in the sharp
battle, Coon, son of Antenor, had wounded with his brazen spear. Then
when all the Greeks were assembled, swift-footed Achilles, rising up
amongst them, said:

"Son of Atreus, this would surely have been somewhat better for both
thee and me,[621] when we two, grieved at heart, raged with
soul-devouring contention for the sake of a girl. Would that Diana had
slain her with an arrow in the ships on that day, when wasting, I took
Lyrnessus; then indeed so many Greeks had not seized the mighty ground
in their teeth under the hands of the enemy, I being continually
enraged. This however was better for Hector and the Trojans, but I think
the Greeks will long remember the contention of you and me. But let us
leave these things as passed, although grieved, subduing from necessity
the soul within our bosoms. And now I terminate my wrath, nor is it at
all fit that I always obstinately be enraged; but come quickly, incite
the long-haired Achæans to battle, in order that still I may make trial
of the Trojans, going against them; if they wish to pass the night at
the ships; but of them I think that any will very gladly bend the knee,
whoever shall escape out of the destructive fight from my spear."

   [Footnote 621: _I.e._ it would have been better for us to have
   been friends, as we now are, than enemies. The construction is
   interrupted, to suit the agitation of the speaker.]

Thus he spoke; but the well-greaved Greeks rejoiced, the magnanimous son
of Peleus renouncing his wrath. But them, the king of men, Agamemnon,
also addressed out of the same place, from his seat, nor advancing into
the midst:

"O friends! heroes of the Greeks, servants of Mars, it is becoming
indeed that ye should hearken to me, thus rising, nor is it convenient
that thou shouldst interrupt; for [it is] difficult, even for one being
skilled.[622] But in a great uproar of men, how can any one hear or
speak? but he is interrupted, although being a clear-toned orator. I
indeed will direct myself to the son of Peleus; but do ye, the other
Greeks, understand, and carefully learn my meaning. Often already have
the Greeks spoken this saying to me, and have rebuked me; but I am not
to blame,[623] but Jove, and Fate, and Erinnys, roaming amid the shades,
who, during the assembly, cast into my mind a sad injury, on that day,
when I myself took away the reward of Achilles. But what could I do? for
the deity accomplishes all things; pernicious Até, the venerable
daughter of Jove, who injures all. Her feet are tender, for she does not
approach the ground, but she walks over the heads of men, injuring
mankind, and one at least[624] [she] fetters. For at one time she
injured even Jove, who, they say, is the most powerful of men and gods;
but him Juno, being a female, deceived by her guile on that day when
Alemene was about to bring forth mighty Hercules in well-walled Thebes.
He indeed, boasting, had said among all the gods:

"Hear me,[625] all ye gods and all ye goddesses, whilst I speak those
things which the mind within my bosom urges. This day Ilithyia,
presiding over births, shall bring into the light a certain man, who
shall be ruler over all his neighbours,--[one] of those men of the blood
of my race!"

   [Footnote 622: _I.e._ even a good speaker can do nothing without
   a fair hearing.]

   [Footnote 623: Cf. iii. 164. Seneca, (Ed. 1019) "Fati ista culpa
   est." Cf. Duport. p. 106. Æsch. Choeph. 910: Ἡ μοῖρα τούτων, ὧ
   τέκνον, παραιτία.]

   [Footnote 624: "A delicate censure of Achilles."--Oxford Transl.]

   [Footnote 625: Cf. Pindar, Ol. iii. 50-105, and Il. v. iii. I
   have followed Heyne's construing, supplying τινα.]

But him the august Juno addressed, devising guile: "Thou shalt lie, nor
shalt thou insure accomplishment to thy speech. But come, swear a firm
oath to me, O Olympian! that he shall indeed be ruler over all his
neighbours, who shall this day fall between the feet of a woman, among
those men, who are of the blood of thy family."

Thus she spoke, but Jove perceived not her crafty design, but he swore
the mighty oath, and afterwards was much befooled.[626] Then Juno
springing forth, quitted the top of Olympus, and came speedily to
Achaean Argos, where she knew the noble spouse of Sthenelus, the son of
Perseus. And she, indeed, was pregnant of her beloved son; and the
seventh month was at hand; and she brought him into light, being
deficient the number of months; but kept back the delivery of Alemene,
and restrained the Ilithyiæ; and herself bearing the message, addressed
Jove, the son of Saturn:

   [Footnote 626: Injured, vexed by his infatuation. Juno was
   thinking of Eurystheus but Jove of Hercules.]

"Father Jove, hurler of the red lightning, I will put a certain matter
in thy mind. A noble man is now born, who shall rule the Argives,
Eurystheus, the son of Perseus, thy offspring; nor is it unbecoming that
he should govern the Argives."

"Thus she spoke; but sharp grief smote him in his deep mind; and
immediately he seized Até by her head of shining curls, enraged in his
mind, and swore a powerful oath, that Até, who injures all, should never
again return to Olympus and the starry heaven.

"Thus saying, he cast her from the starry heaven, whirling her round in
his hand, but she quickly reached the works of men. On her account he
always groaned,[627] when he beheld his beloved son suffering unworthy
toil under the labours of[628] Eurystheus.

"So I also, when the great crest-tossing Hector was thus[629] destroying
the Greeks at the sterns of the ships, was not able to forget the wrong
which I had formerly foolishly committed. But since I have suffered
harm, and Jove has taken away my reason, I am willing again to appease
thee, and to give infinite presents. But arise to the battle, and incite
the other people, and I myself [will pledge myself] to furnish all the
presents, as many as noble Ulysses yesterday, going to thee, promised in
thy tents. Yet, if thou wilt, wait a little, although hastening to
battle, and my servants, taking the presents from my ship, shall bring
them, that thou mayest see that I will present [thee] with appeasing
offerings."

But him swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed; "Most glorious son
of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, whether thou wilt furnish gifts, as
is meet, or keep them with thee, [will be seen]; but now let us very
quickly be mindful of the contest; for it is not fitting to waste time
in idle talk,[630] nor to delay; as a mighty work is yet undone. But as
some one may again behold Achilles among the front ranks, destroying the
phalanxes of the Trojans with his brazen spear, so also let some one of
you, keeping this in mind, fight with [his] man."

   [Footnote 627: On the servitude of Hercules, see Grote, vol. i.
   p. 128.]

   [Footnote 628: _I.e._ imposed by.]

   [Footnote 629: "The parallel implied here is of the havoc
   occasioned by Hector, and the laborious tasks imposed by
   Eurystheus. Such appears to be the force of the
   particle."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 630: Hesych.; Κλοτοπεύειν· παραλογίζεσθαι......
   οτραγγύεσθαι.]

But him Ulysses, of many wiles, answering, addressed: "Not thus, brave
as thou art, O godlike Achilles, urge on the sons of the Greeks,
fasting, towards Ilium, about to fight with the Trojans; for the
conflict will not be for a short time only, when once the phalanxes of
men shall mingle, and a god breathe might into both. But command the
Greeks to be fed at the ships with food and wine, for this is might and
vigour. For a man, unrefreshed by food, would not be able to fight
against [the enemy] all day to the setting sun; for although he might
desire in his mind to fight, yet his limbs gradually grow languid, and
thirst and hunger come upon him, and his knees fail him as he goes. The
man, on the other hand, who is satiated with wine and food, fights all
day with hostile men, the heart within his breast is daring, nor are his
limbs at all fatigued before that all retire from battle. But come,
dismiss the people, and order a repast to be made ready; and let the
king of men, Agamemnon, bring the gifts into the midst of the assembly,
that all the Greeks may see them with their eyes, and thou mayest be
delighted in thy mind. Let him, moreover, swear an oath to thee,
standing up among the Greeks, that he has never ascended her bed, nor
has been mingled with her, as is the custom, O king, of men and wives;
and to thee thyself, also, let the soul within thy breast be placid.
Then let him next conciliate thee by a rich banquet within his tents,
that thou mayest not have aught wanting of redress. And for the future,
O son of Atreus, thou wilt be more just towards another; for it is by no
means unworthy that a king should appease a man, when he[631] may first
have given offence."

   [Footnote 631: Understand βασιλεύς.]

But him the king of men, Agamemnon, in return addressed:

"I rejoice, O son of Laërtes, having heard thy speech, for with
propriety hast thou gone through and enumerated all things. These things
I am willing to swear, and my mind orders me, in presence of a god, nor
will I perjure myself. But let Achilles remain here, at least for a
little while, though hastening to battle, and do all ye others remain
assembled, until they bring the gifts from my tent, and we strike
faithful leagues. To thyself, however, [O Ulysses], I give this charge,
and order thee, selecting the principal youths of all the Greeks, to
bear from my ship the gifts, as many as we yesterday promised that we
should give to Achilles, and to lead [hither] the women. But let
Talthybius also quickly prepare for me through the wide army of the
Greeks, a boar to sacrifice to Jove and the sun."

Him answering, swift-footed Achilles then addressed:

"Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, at some other time
ought they rather to attend to these things, when any cessation of
battle hereafter be, and so much ardour be not in my bosom: but at
present those lie mangled, whom Hector, son of Priam, subdued, when Jove
gave him the glory: but ye urge [them] to food! Now indeed I should
excite the sons of the Greeks to fight, fasting, but with the setting
sun, to prepare a large supper, after we have revenged our disgrace.
Before that neither drink nor food shall pass down my throat, my
companion being slain, who lies in my tent, torn with the sharp brass,
turned towards the vestibule, whilst his comrades mourn around these
things are not a care to my mind, but slaughter and bloodshed, and the
dreadful groans of heroes."

But him much-scheming Ulysses answering, addressed:

"O Achilles, son of Peleus, by far the bravest of the Greeks, thou art
superior indeed to me, and not a little more valiant with the spear, but
I indeed excel thee much in prudence; because I was born before thee,
and know more: wherefore let thy mind be restrained by my words. Soon is
there a satiety of contest to the men, a most abundant crop of whom the
brass pours upon the earth; but the harvest is very small, when Jove,
who is the umpire of the battle of men, inclines his scales. It is by no
means fit that the Greeks should lament the dead with the stomach, for
in great numbers and one upon another are they every day falling; when
therefore could any one respire from toil? But it is necessary to bury
him, whosoever may die, having a patient mind, weeping for a day.[632]
But as many as survive the hateful combat should be mindful of drinking
and of food, in order that we may ever the more ceaselessly contend with
our enemies, clad as to our bodies in impenetrable brass; nor let any of
the troops lie by awaiting another exhortation. For evilly will that
exhortation come upon him, whoever may be left at the ships of the
Greeks; but advancing in a body, let us stir up the keen battle against
the horse-breaking Trojans."

   [Footnote 632: Libanius, Or. ix. in Julian.: Ὤ πολλὰ συγκινήσας
   ἐπὶ σαυτῷ δάκρυα, οὐκ ἐπ' ἤματι κατὰ τὸ ἔπος, ὀλοφυρμοι τυχῶν.
   See Duport, p. 111.]

He said, and chose as his companions the sons of glorious Nestor, and
Meges, son of Phyleus, Thoas, and Meriones, Lycomedes, son of Creon, and
Melanippus; and they proceeded to go towards the tent of Agamemnon, son
of Atreus. Immediately after the word was spoken, and the work was
perfected. Seven tripods they bore from the tent, which he had promised
him, and twenty splendid goblets, and twelve steeds; and straightway led
forth seven blameless women, skilled in works, but the eighth was
fair-cheeked Briseïs. But Ulysses, placing[633] ten whole talents of
gold, led the way, and with him the other youths of the Greeks bore the
presents, and placed them in the midst of the assembly; but Agamemnon
rose up; and Talthybius, like unto a god in his voice, stood beside the
shepherd of the people, holding a boar in his hands. Then the son of
Atreus, drawing the knife with his hands, which always hung by the
great scabbard of his sword, cutting off the forelock of the boar,
prayed, lifting up his hands to Jove; but all the Greeks sat in silence
in the same spot, listening in a becoming manner to the king. But
praying, he spoke, looking towards the wide heaven:

   [Footnote 633: _I.e._ in the scale, in order to be weighed.]

"Now first let Jove be witness, the most supreme and best of gods, and
Earth, and Sun, and ye Furies, who beneath the earth chastise men,
whoever may swear a falsehood; never have I laid hands upon the maid
Briseïs, needing her for the sake of the couch, or any other purpose;
but inviolate has she remained in my tents. But if any of these things
be false, may the gods inflict on me those very many distresses which
they inflict when men sin in swearing."

He said, and cut the throat of the boar with the ruthless brass; which
Talthybius, whirling round, cast into the mighty water of the hoary sea,
as food for fishes. But Achilles, rising, said among the war-loving
Greeks:

"O father Jove, certainly thou givest great calamities to men; for never
could Atrides have so thoroughly aroused the indignation in my bosom,
nor foolish, led away the girl, I being unwilling, but Jove for some
intent wished death should happen to many Greeks. But now go to the
repast, that we may join battle."

Thus then he spoke, and dissolved the assembly in haste.[634]

   [Footnote 634: So Od. viii. 38: Θοὴν ἀλεγύνετε δαῖτα, i.e. θοῶς.
   Virg. Æn. iv. 226: "Celeres defer mea dicta per auras," which
   Servius interprets, "celer, vel celeriter."]

They indeed were separated, each to his own ship; but the magnanimous
Myrmidons were occupied about the gifts, and, bearing them, went to the
ship of godlike Achilles. These they laid up in the tents, and placed
the women in seats; but the illustrious attendants drove the horses to
the stud. But afterwards Briseïs, like unto golden Venus, when she
beheld Patroclus lacerated with the sharp spear, throwing herself about
him, wept aloud, and with her hands tore her breast and tender neck, and
fair countenance.[635] Then the woman, like unto the goddesses, weeping,
said:

"O Patroclus! most dear to my wretched soul, I left thee indeed alive,
departing from my tent, but now returning, I find thee dead, O chieftain
of the people! How in my case evil ever succeeds evil. The hero indeed
to whom my father and venerable mother had given me,[636] I saw pierced
with the sharp brass before the city; and three beloved brothers whom
the same mother had brought forth to me, all drew on the destructive
day. Nevertheless, thou didst not suffer me to weep, when swift Achilles
slew my husband, and laid waste the city of divine Mynes, but thou
saidst thou wouldst render me the wedded wife[637] of noble Achilles,
lead me in the ships to Phthia, and prepare the nuptial feast amongst
the Myrmidons. Therefore do I insatiably lament thee dead, being ever
gentle."

   [Footnote 635: On these ancient signs of lamentation cf. Virg.
   Æn. iv. 672; xii. 605; Silius, viii. 153; Tusc. Quæst. iii. 26.
   Æsch. Choeph. 22: Πρέπει παρήϊς φοινίοις ἀμυγμοῖς. Eur. Hel.
   1098: Παρῇδι τ' ὄνυχα φόνιον ἐμβαλῶ χροός. Orest. 950: Τιθεῖσα
   λευκὸν ὄνυχα δίὰ παρηΐδων, αἱματηρὸν ἄταν. Artemidor. i. Ἐν τοῖς
   πένθεσι λάβωνται τὰς παρείας οἱ ἄνθρωποι. See Comm. on Petron.
   cxi.]

   [Footnote 636: The consent of both parents was necessary to a
   contract of marriage. See Feith, Antiq. Hom. ii. 13, 3.]

   [Footnote 637: She appears to have been, at present, only
   betrothed.]

Thus she spoke, weeping; and the women lamented for Patroclus, as a
pretext, but [really] each for her own ills. And around him (Achilles)
were collected the elders of the Greeks, entreating him to take
refreshment; but he, moaning, refused:

"I entreat [you], if any of my beloved companions would be obedient to
me, bid me not satiate my heart with food or drink, since heavy grief
hath invaded me; but I will wait entirely till the setting sun, and will
endure."

So saying, he dismissed the other kings: but two sons of Atreus
remained; and noble Ulysses, Nestor, Idomeneus, and the aged knight
Phœnix, constantly endeavouring to delight him sorrowing; nor was he at
all delighted, before he should enter the mouth[638] of bloody war. But
remembering [Patroclus], he frequently heaved [a sigh], and said:

   [Footnote 638: So Ennius, p. 128. Hessel.: "Belli ferratos
   posteis portasque refregit." Virg. Æn. i. 298: "Claudentur belli
   portæ." Stat. Theb. v. 136: "Movet ostia belli."]

"Surely once, thou too, O unhappy one! dearest of my companions, wouldst
thyself have set before me a plentiful feast, within my tent, speedily
and diligently, when the Greeks hastened to make tearful war upon the
horse-breaking Trojans. But now thou liest mangled; but my heart is
without drink and food, though they are within, from regret for thee;
for I could not suffer anything worse, not even if I were to hear of my
father being dead, who now perhaps sheds the tender tear in Phthia from
the want of such a son; while I, in a foreign people, wage war against
the Trojans, for the sake of detested Helen: or him, my beloved son, who
is nurtured for me at Scyros, if indeed he still lives, godlike
Neoptolemus. For formerly the mind within my bosom hoped that I alone
should perish here in Troy, far from steed-nourishing Argos, and that
thou shouldst return to Phthia, that thou mightst lead back my son in
thy black ship from Scyros, and mightst show him everything, my
property, my servants, and my great, lofty-domed abode. For now I
suppose that Peleus is either totally deceased, or that he, barely
alive, suffers pain from hateful old age, and that he is continually
expecting bad news respecting me, when he shall hear of my being dead."

Thus he spoke, weeping; and the elders also groaned, remembering, each
of them, the things which they had left in their dwellings. But the son
of Saturn felt compassion, seeing them weeping, and immediately to
Minerva addressed winged words:

"O daughter mine, thou entirely now desertest thy valiant hero. Is
Achilles then no longer at all a care to thee in thy mind? He himself is
sitting before his lofty-beaked ships, bewailing his dear companion;
while the others have gone to a banquet; but he is unrefreshed and
unfed. Go, therefore, instil into his breast nectar and delightful
ambrosia, that hunger may come not upon him."

So saying, he urged on Minerva, who was before eager. But she, like unto
a broad-winged, shrill-voiced harpy, leaped down from the heavens
through the air. The Greeks, however, were then arming themselves
throughout the camp, when she instilled into the bosom of Achilles
nectar and delightful ambrosia, that unpleasant hunger might not come
upon his limbs. Then she went to the solid mansion of her powerful sire,
and they, apart, poured forth from the swift ships.

And as when thick snow-flakes fly down from Jove, beneath the force of
the cold, air-clearing Boreas; so from the ships were borne out crowded
helmets, shining brightly, and bossed shields, strong-cavitied corslets,
and ashen spears. But the sheen reached to heaven, and all the earth
around smiled beneath the splendour of the brass; and a trampling of the
feet of men arose beneath. In the midst noble Achilles was armed, and
there was a gnashing of his teeth, and his eyes shone like a blaze of
fire; but intolerable grief entered his heart within him, and, enraged
against the Trojans, he put on the gifts of the god, which Vulcan,
toiling, had fabricated for him. First around his legs he placed the
beautiful greaves, joined with silver clasps, next he put on the corslet
round his breast, and suspended from his shoulders the brazen,
silver-studded sword; then he seized the shield, large and solid, the
sheen of which went to a great distance, as of the moon.[639] And as
when from the sea the blaze of a burning fire shines to mariners, which
is lit aloft amongst the mountains in a solitary place; but the storm
bears them against their inclination away from their friends over the
fishy deep; so from the shield of Achilles, beautiful and skilfully
made, the brightness reached the sky. But raising it, he placed the
strong helmet upon his head; and the helmet, crested with horse-hair,
shone like a star; and the golden tufts which Vulcan had diffused thick
around the cone were shaken. Then noble Achilles tried himself in his
arms if they would fit him, and if his fair limbs would move freely in
them; but they were like wings to him, and lifted up the shepherd of the
people. And from its sheath he drew forth his paternal spear, heavy,
great, and stout, which no other of the Greeks was able to brandish, but
Achilles alone knew how to hurl it--a Pelian ash, which Chiron had cut
for his father from the top of Pelion, to be a destruction to heroes.
But Automedon and Alcimus, harnessing the steeds, yoked them; and
beautiful collars were upon them. They put the bridles into their jaws,
and drew back the reins towards the well-glued car, when Automedon,
seizing the shining lash, fitted to his hand, leaped into the car;
Achilles, armed for battle, mounted behind him, glittering in his armour
like the shining sun; and terribly he gave command to the horses of his
sire:

   [Footnote 639: Milton, P. L. i. 284:

                 "........ his pond'rous shield
         Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round,
         Behind him cast; the broad circumference
         Hung on his shoulders like the moon."]

"Xanthus, and Balius, illustrious offspring of Podarges, resolve now in
a different manner to bring back your charioteer in safety to the body
of the Greeks, after we are satiated with battle, nor leave him there
dead, like Patroclus."

But from beneath the yoke, Xanthus, his swift-footed steed, addressed
him, and immediately hung down his head, and his whole mane, drooping
from the ring which was near the yoke, reached the ground. But the
white-armed goddess Juno gave him the power of speech:

"Now, at least, we will bear thee safe, O impetuous Achilles: but the
fatal day draws nigh to thee; nor are we to blame, but a mighty deity
and violent destiny. For not by our laziness, or sloth, have the Trojans
stripped the armour from the shoulders of Patroclus; but the bravest of
the gods, whom fair-haired Latona brought forth, slew him among the
front ranks, and gave glory to Hector. And [though] we can run even with
the blast of Zephyrus, which they say is the most fleet, yet to thyself
it is fated that thou shouldst be violently subdued by a god and a man."

Of him, having thus spoken, the Furies restrained the voice: but him
swift-footed Achilles, greatly indignant, addressed:

"O Xanthus, why dost thou predict my death to me? For it is not at all
necessary for thee. Well do I myself know that it is my fate to perish
here, far away from my dear father and mother. Nevertheless I will not
cease before the Trojans are abundantly satiated with war."

He spoke, and shouting amongst the front ranks, directed on his
solid-hoofed steeds.




                          BOOK THE TWENTIETH


                               ARGUMENT.

Jove permits the gods to join in the battle, and they take their
respective places on either side. Æneas engages Achilles, but is rescued
by Neptune. Hector, in revenge for the death of his brother Polydorus,
also attacks Achilles, and is only saved from death by the intervention
of Apollo. Achilles then slays many Trojans.


Thus around thee, O son of Peleus, were the Achæans armed, insatiable in
fight, beside their crooked ships; and the Trojans, on the other side,
on the acclivity[640] of the plain. But Jove ordered Themis to summon
the gods to an assembly, from the top of many-valleyed Olympus, and she,
going round, ordered them to proceed to the palace of Jove. Nor was any
one of the rivers absent, save Oceanus, nor of the nymphs who inhabit
the pleasant groves and springs of rivers, and the grassy meads. Then,
coming to the habitation of cloud-compelling Jove, they sat down upon
shining polished benches, which Vulcan with cunning skill had made for
father Jove. Thus were they assembled within the palace of Jove: nor did
Neptune disobey the goddess, but he came to them from the sea. Then he
sat in the midst, and inquired the design of Jove:

   [Footnote 640: See x. 160; xi. 56.]

"Why again, O hurler of the glowing lightning, hast thou summoned the
gods to an assembly? Dost thou deliberate anything respecting the
Trojans and Greeks? For now their combat and the battle are on the point
of being kindled."

But him cloud-compelling Jove answering, addressed:

"Thou knowest, O earth-shaker, my design within my breast, [and] for
whose sake I have assembled you; for though about to perish, they are a
care to me. I will, however, remain sitting on the top of Olympus,
whence looking, I shall delight my soul; but depart the rest of you,
that ye may go to the Trojans and Greeks. Give aid to both, according as
is the inclination of each. For if Achilles alone shall fight against
the Trojans, they will not even for a little sustain the swift-footed
son of Peleus. Formerly even beholding him, they fled terrified; but now
when he is grievously enraged in his mind on account of his companion, I
fear lest he overthrow the wall, even contrary to fate."

Thus spoke Saturnian Jove, and he stirred up the unyielding[641]
contest; and the gods hastened to proceed to the battle, having
discordant minds. Juno, indeed, and Pallas Minerva [went] to the
assemblage of the ships, as well as earth-shaking Neptune, and useful
Mercury, who excelled in a prudent mind, with whom went Vulcan, looking
savage in his might, limping, and under him his weak limbs moved with
all their force. But to the Trojans [went] crest-tossing Mars, and with
him unshorn Phœbus,[642] and Diana, delighting in archery, Latona,
Xanthus, and laughter-loving Venus. As long as the gods were apart from
mortal men, so long the Greeks were greatly elated, because Achilles
appeared, for he had long abstained from the dire battle; and a violent
tremor came upon the Trojans, upon each of them as to their limbs,
fearing because they beheld the swift-footed son of Peleus glittering in
arms, equal to man-slaughtering Mars. But after the Olympians had come
to the crowd of men, then arose fierce Contention, the exciter of the
people, and Minerva shouted, sometimes standing beside the trench,
outside the wall, at other times she loudly shouted along the echoing
shores. But Mars yelled aloud on the other side, like unto a dark
whirlwind, keenly animating the Trojans from the lofty city, at other
times running along the Simoïs over Callicolone.[643]

Thus the blessed gods, inciting both sides, engaged, and among them made
severe contention to break out. But dreadfully from above thundered the
father of gods and men; whilst beneath Neptune shook the boundless earth
and the lofty summits of the mountains. The roots and all the summits of
many-rilled Ida were shaken, and the city of the Trojans, and the ships
of the Greeks. Pluto himself, king of the nether world, trembled
beneath, and leaped up from his throne, terrified, and shouted aloud,
lest earth-shaking Neptune should rend asunder the earth over him, and
disclose to mortals and immortals his mansions, terrible, squalid, which
even the gods loathe. So great a tumult arose from the gods engaging in
combat. Against king Neptune, indeed, stood Phœbus Apollo, having his
winged shafts, and against Mars the azure-eyed goddess Minerva. Opposed
to Juno stood the goddess of the golden bow, huntress Diana, rejoicing
in archery, the sister of Apollo; and opposite Latona, the
preserver,[644] useful Mercury. Against Vulcan also was the great
deep-eddying river, which the gods call Xanthus, and men the Scamander.

   [Footnote 641: Buttm. Lexil. p. 406, 3: "The adjective αλίαστος,
   literally _unbending, unyielding, not to be turned_, became the
   epithet of a violent, uncontrollable, incessant tumult, battle,
   lamentation, &c, as at Iλ. M. 471; B. 797; Ω. 760; and as an
   adverb at Ω. 549."]

   [Footnote 642: Hor. Od. i. xxii. 2: "Intonsum, pueri, dicite
   Cynthium." Tibull. i. 4, 37: "Solis æterna est Phœbo, Bacchoque
   juventa: hanc decet intonsus crinis utrumque Deum." Various
   reasons are assigned for this; such as, "quia occidendo et
   renascendo semper est juvenior," Fulgent. Myth. i. 17; or, "quod
   ipse sit sol, et sol ignis est, qui nunquam senescit," Lutat. on
   Stat. Theb. i. 694. The inhabitants of Hieropolis, however,
   worshipped a bearded Apollo.--Macr. Sat. i. 17.]

   [Footnote 643: A rising ground which lay on the road from Troy
   towards the sea-coast, on the other side of the Simoïs,
   commanding the entire plain. Hence it is the rendezvous of the
   gods who favoured the Trojans.]

   [Footnote 644: We find a collateral verb σωκεῖιν=_valere_, in
   Æsch. Eum. 36. Apollon. Lex. p. 762; Hesych. t. ii. p. 1334,
   derive σῶκως from σωσίοικος, the former connecting it with
   ἐριούνιος, ὁ μεγάλως ὀνίσκων, τοῦτ' ἔστι ὀφελῶν.]

Thus indeed gods went against gods; but Achilles chiefly longed to
penetrate through the crowd against Hector, the son of Priam; for with
his blood his mind particularly ordered him to satiate Mars, the
invincible warrior. But Apollo, exciter of troops, immediately aroused
Æneas against the son of Peleus, and infused into him strong courage.
And he likened himself in voice to Lycaon, the son of Priam, and having
likened himself to him, Apollo, the son of Jove, said:

"O Æneas, counsellor of the Trojans, where are thy threats which, whilst
carousing, thou didst promise to the leaders of the Trojans, that thou
wouldst fight against Achilles, the son of Peleus?"

But him Æneas, answering, addressed in turn:

"Son of Priam, why dost thou order me, not wishing it, these things, to
fight against magnanimous Pelides? For shall I not now for the first
time stand against swift-footed Achilles, but already, on another
occasion, he chased me with his spear from Ida, when he attacked our
cattle, and laid waste Lyrnessus and Pedasus: but Jove preserved me, who
excited my strength and nimble limbs. Certainly I should have been
subdued beneath the hands of Achilles, and Minerva, who, preceding, gave
him victory, and encouraged him to slay the Lelegans and Trojans with
his brazen spear. Wherefore it is not possible that a man should fight
against Achilles, because one of the gods is ever beside him, who averts
destruction. Besides, also, his weapon flies direct, nor stops before it
has pierced through human flesh; though if the deity would extend an
equal scale of victory, not very easily would he conquer me, although he
boasts himself to be all brazen."

But him again king Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed:

"But do thou also pray, O hero, to the immortal gods, for they say that
thou too art sprung from Venus, the daughter of Jove, but he from an
inferior goddess; for the one is from Jove, and the other from the aged
sea-god. But direct thy invincible brass right against him, nor let him
at all avert thee by haughty words and threats."

Thus saying, he breathed great courage into the shepherd of the people;
and he advanced through the front ranks, accoutred in shining brass. Nor
did the son of Anchises escape the notice of white-armed Juno, going
against the son of Peleus through the ranks of men; but, calling the
gods together, she addressed them:

"Consider now, both Neptune and Minerva, in your minds, how these things
shall be. This Æneas, accoutred in shining brass, has advanced against
the son of Peleus; and Phœbus Apollo has urged him on. But come, let us,
however, turn him back again; or let some one of us stand by Achilles,
and give him great strength, nor let him at all be wanting in courage;
that he may know that the mightiest of the immortals love him; and that
those, on the contrary, are vain, who hitherto avert war and slaughter
from the Trojans. But we have all come down from Olympus, about to
participate in this battle, lest he should suffer anything among the
Trojans to-day; but hereafter he shall suffer those things, as
many as Fate at his birth wove in his thread [of destiny],[645] to him,
what time his mother brought him forth. But if Achilles shall not learn
these things from the voice of a god, he will afterwards be afraid when
any god comes against him in battle; for the gods, when made manifest,
are terrible to be seen manifestly." [646]

But her then earth-shaking Neptune answered:

"Juno, be not beyond reason enraged; nor is it at all necessary. I,
indeed, would not desire that we should engage the other gods in a
battle, since we are much more powerful.[647] Rather let us, going out
of the way, sit down upon a place of observation,[648] but the war shall
be a care to mortals. But if Mars shall begin the combat, or Apollo, or
shall restrain Achilles, and not suffer him to fight, then immediately
shall the strife of contention there arise to us; and I think that they,
having very speedily decided it, will return to Olympus, and mix with
the assembly of other gods, violently subdued by necessity under our
hands."

Thus then having spoken, the azure-haired [god] led the way to the lofty
mound-raised wall of divine Hercules, which the Trojans and Pallas
Minerva had made, that, flying, he might escape from the sea-monster,
when pursued from the shore to the plain. There then Neptune sat down,
and the other gods, and drew an indissoluble cloud around their
shoulders; whilst on the other side they sat upon the tops of
Callicolone, around thee, O archer Apollo, and Mars, the sacker of
cities. Thus they sat on both sides, planning designs, yet both were
unwilling to commence grievous war; but Jove, sitting aloft, cheered
them on. All the plain, however, was filled with them, and glittered
with the brass of men and horses, and the earth echoed under the feet of
them rushing together. But two heroes, by far the most valiant, advanced
towards [each other] into the midst of both armies, eager to
fight,--Æneas, the son of Anchises, and noble Achilles. And first Æneas,
threatening, advanced, nodding with his strong casque; and before his
breast he held his impetuous shield, and shook his brazen spear. But on
the other side Pelides rushed against him like a destructive lion, which
men assembled together, a whole village, are anxious to kill. He,
however, at first despising them, proceeds; but when some one of
vigorous youths has wounded him with a dart, yawning, he collects
himself [for a spring],[649] and the foam arises round his teeth, and
his valiant soul groans within his breast, and he lashes his sides and
thighs on both sides with his tail, and rouses himself to battle; then,
grimly glaring, he is borne straight on by his strength, if he can kill
some of the men, or is himself destroyed in the first crowd. Thus did
his might and noble soul urge Achilles to go against magnanimous Æneas.
But when now, advancing, they approached each other, swift-footed, noble
Achilles first addressed the other:

   [Footnote 645: See Duport, p. 114. On the web woven by the Fates
   for man's life, see Virg. Ecl. iv. 46; Catullus, lxiv. 328. But
   this passage of Homer seems to imply the ancient notion, that the
   Fates might be delayed, but never set aside. Cf. Nemes. de Nat.
   Horn. i. 36; Censorin. de die Nat. xiv.; Serv. on Æn. vii. 398.]

   [Footnote 646: "Deos _manifesto_ in lumine vidi."--Virg. Æn. iv.
   358. On the belief that the sight of a god was attended with
   danger, cf. Liv. i. xvi. where Proculus beseeches the apparition
   of Romulus "ut contra intueri fas esset." See intpp. on Exod.
   xxxiii. 20; Judges xiii. 22.]

   [Footnote 647: I am half inclined to condemn this verse as
   spurious, with Ernesti. It is wanting in MS. Lips, and ed. Rom.,
   and does not appear to have been read by Eustathius.]

   [Footnote 648: Compare the "Contemplantes" of Lucan, sub init.,
   where the gods seek a similar place of observation.]

   [Footnote 649: So ἀλεὶς in xv. 403. "It is also used in the same
   way of a warrior, who, whilst he is preparing to rush on his
   enemy, or expecting his attack, draws himself up together, or, as
   we say, puts himself in an attitude of attack or
   defence."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 258.]

"Why, O Æneas, coming through so great a length of crowd, dost thou
stand against me? Does then thy soul urge thee to fight with me, hoping
that thou wilt govern the horse-breaking Trojans in the place[650] of
Priam? Yet even if thou shalt slay me, not thus will Priam place this
reward in thy hand: for he has sons; and he is himself steady, nor
inconstant. Or, if thou slayest me, have the Trojans cut off for thee an
enclosure[651] of soil surpassing others, suited to vines and the
plough, that thou mayest cultivate it? Still I hope thou wilt effect it
with difficulty. For I think I have at some other time put thee to
flight with my spear. Dost thou not remember when I impetuously drove
thee, when alone, from the oxen, with rapid feet, down the Idæan
mountains? Then indeed thou didst never turn round while flying, but
didst escape thence into Lyrnessus; but I wasted it, having attacked it
with the aid of Minerva and father Jove. The women also I led away
captives, having taken away their day of freedom; but Jove and the other
gods preserved thee. However, I do not think they will protect thee now,
as thou castest in thy mind; but I exhort thee, retiring, to go into the
crowd, nor stand against me, before thou suffer some evil; but [it is] a
fool [who] knows a thing [only] when it is done."

   [Footnote 650: Άγτὶ..... βασιλείας is Gaza's correct paraphrase.]

   [Footnote 651: Cf 194.]

But him Æneas answered in turn, and said:

"Do not think, O son of Peleus, to affright me, like an infant boy, with
words; since I also well know how to utter both threats and reproaches.
But we know each other's race, and we know our parents, hearing the
words of mortal men long since uttered; although by sight, indeed,
neither dost thou know mine, nor I thine. They say, indeed, that thou
art the offspring of renowned Peleus, and of thy mother Thetis, the
fair-haired sea-nymph; whereas I boast myself to be sprung from
magnanimous Anchises, and Venus is my mother. Of these the one or the
other shall this day lament their beloved son; for I think we shall not
return from the battle thus separated by childish words. But if thou
desirest to be taught these matters, that thou mayest well know our race
(for many men know it), cloud-compelling Jove indeed first begat
Dardanus.[652] And he built Dardania, for sacred Ilium, the city of
articulate-speaking men, was not as yet built in the plain, and they
still dwelt at the foot of many-rilled Ida. Dardanus again begat a son,
king Erichthonius, who was then the richest of mortal men; whose three
thousand mares pastured through the marsh, rejoicing in their tender
foals. Boreas, however, was enamoured of some of these when pasturing,
and having likened himself to an azure-maned steed, covered them; and
they, becoming pregnant, brought forth twelve female foals; which when
they bounded upon the fruitful earth, ran over the highest fruit of the
stalks of corn, nor did they break them:[653] but when they sported over
the broad back of the ocean, they ran along the surface of the ridge of
the hoary sea. But Erichthonius begat Tros, king of the Trojans. From
Tros again were descended three illustrious sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and
godlike Ganymede, who indeed was the handsomest of mortal men; and whom
the gods caught up into heaven, to pour out wine for Jove,[654] that, on
account of his beauty, he might be with the immortals. Ilus again begat
his renowned son Laomedon; but Laomedon begat Tithonus and Priam,
Lampus, Clytius, and Hicetaon, a branch of Mars; and Assaracus Capys,
who also begat his son Anchises. But Anchises begat me, and Priam noble
Hector. Of this race and blood do I boast myself to be. But Jove
increases and diminishes valour to men, as he pleases; for he is the
most powerful of all. But come, let us no longer talk of these things,
like little boys, standing in the middle combat of the strife. For it is
possible for both to utter very many reproaches, so that a hundred-oared
galley[655] would not contain the burthen; for the language of mortals
is voluble,[656] and the discourses in it numerous and varied: and vast
is the distribution[657] of words here and there. Whatsoever word thou
mayest speak, such also wilt thou hear. But what need is there to us of
disputes and railing, that we should quarrel with each other like women,
who, being angry with a soul-destroying strife, proceeding into the
middle of the way, chide each other with many things true and not true:
for rage also suggests those things?[658] With words, however, thou
shalt not turn me, courageous, from my valour, before thou lightest
against me with thy brass; but come, quickly let us make trial of each
other with brazen spears."

   [Footnote 652: On Dardanus, the eponymus of Dardania, see Grote,
   vol. i. p. 387, where the whole legend of Troy is admirably
   discussed. Cf. Virg. Æn. i. 292; iii. 167, where the Roman poet
   has made use of Homer in tracing the pedigree of Æneas to Jove.]

   [Footnote 653: This hyperbole has been emulated by numberless
   poets. Cf. Oppian, Cyn. i. 231; Apollon. Rh. i. 183; Quintus
   Calab. viii. 156; Virg. Æn. vii. 808; Claudian in 3rd Cons. Hon.
   i. 97.]

   [Footnote 654: Cf. Pindar, Ol. i. 69, and Serv. on Æn. i. 32.]

   [Footnote 655: Compare the Latin phrase, "plaustra convitiorum,"
   and Duport, p. 116.]

   [Footnote 656: Στρεπτή--ὑyρa καί εύλύγιστος.--Eustath.]

   [Footnote 657: Νομος, έπινέμησις έφ' έκάτεοα.--Eustath. See
   Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 658: "_I.e._ prompts to utter all sorts of things, true
   and false."--Oxf. Tr.]

He spoke, and hurled his brazen spear against the dreadful shield,
terrible [to be seen], and the huge buckler resounded with the stroke of
the javelin. But the son of Peleus, alarmed, held the shield from him
with his strong hand, for he supposed that the long spear of
great-hearted Æneas would easily penetrate; foolish! nor did he reflect
in his mind and soul, that the glorious gifts of the gods are not easy
to be subdued by mortal men, nor to yield. Nor then did the heavy spear
of warlike Æneas penetrate the shield; but the gold stopped it, the gift
of the god. It penetrated, however, through two folds, but there were
still three; since Vulcan had drawn five folds over it, two brazen, two
inside of tin, and one golden; in which the brazen spear was stopped.
But Achilles next sent forth his long-shadowed spear, and struck against
the shield of Æneas, equal on all sides, at the outside edge, where the
thinnest brass ran round it, and the ox-hide was thinnest upon it; but
the Pelian ash broke through, and the shield was crushed by it. But
Æneas crouched,[659] and being terrified, held the shield from him;
whilst the spear [passing] over his back, stuck in the earth eager [to
go on], for it had burst through both orbs of the mighty[660] shield.
But he, having escaped the long spear, stood still, but immoderate
sadness was poured over his eyes, terrified, because the weapon had
stuck so near him. But Achilles eagerly sprang upon him, drawing his
sharp sword, and shouting dreadfully. Then Æneas seized in his hand a
stone, a great weight, which not two men could bear, such as men now
are; but he, though alone, easily wielded it. Then indeed had Æneas
smitten him, rushing on, with the stone, either upon the helmet or the
shield, which kept off grievous destruction from him; and Pelides, in
close fight, had taken away his life with the sword, had not
earth-shaking Neptune quickly perceived it, and immediately addressed
this speech to the immortal gods:

   [Footnote 659: See on ver. 168.]

   [Footnote 660: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 83. The Schol. and Hesych.
   t. i. p. 296, interpret it "man-encircling."]

"Ye gods! certainly there now is grief to me, on account of magnanimous
Æneas,[661] who will quickly descend to Hades, subdued by the son of
Peleus, foolish, being persuaded by the words of far-darting Apollo; nor
can he by any means avert[662] sad destruction from him. But why now
should this guiltless[663] man suffer evils gratuitously, on account of
sorrows due to others, for he always presents gifts agreeable to the
gods who inhabit the wide heaven? But come, let us withdraw him from
death, lest even the son of Saturn be angry, if indeed Achilles slay
this man: moreover, it is fated that he should escape, that the race of
Dardanus, whom Jove loved above all the children that were descended
from him and mortal women, may not perish without offspring, and become
extinct. For already hath the son of Saturn hated the race of Priam, and
the might of Æneas shall now rule over the Trojans, and the sons of his
sons, who may be born in after-times."

   [Footnote 661: The remarks of Grote, vol. i. p. 428, sqq. on the
   character and position of Æneas throughout the Iliad, deserve
   much attention.]

   [Footnote 662: "The examples of χραισμεῖν are frequent enough in
   Homer to enable us safely to assert, from a comparison of them,
   that it never has (at least in his writings) the more general
   meaning of _to be useful, to help_, but, without an exception,
   the more definite sense of _to ward off_..... by examining
   passages we find, that even where no accusative is expressed, the
   evil to be warded off may always be inferred from the
   context."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 542.]

   [Footnote 663: He had wished to restore Helen. See Liv. i. 1.]

But him large-eyed venerable Juno then answered:

"O earth-shaker! do thou thyself reflect within thy mind, with respect
to Æneas, whether thou wilt withdraw him, or suffer him, being brave, to
be subdued by Achilles, the son of Peleus. For already we two, I and
Pallas Minerva, have sworn many oaths amongst all the immortals, that we
will never help to avert the evil day from the Trojans, not even when
all Troy, fired, shall burn with consuming flame, and the warlike sons
of the Greeks fire it."

But when earth-shaking Neptune heard this, he hastened to go through the
battle and the clash of spears; and came where were Æneas and renowned
Achilles. And immediately he shed a darkness upon the eyes of Achilles,
son of Peleus, and he drew out the ashen spear, well guarded with brass,
from the shield of magnanimous Æneas; and laid it before the feet of
Achilles, and pushed on Æneas, lifting him high up from the ground. But
Æneas leaped over many ranks of men and many of horses, impelled by the
hand of the god, and came to the rear of the troubled fight, where the
Caucones were arrayed for war. But very near him came earth-shaking
Neptune, and addressing him, spoke winged words:

"O Æneas, which of the gods commanded thee, thus mad, to combat against
Achilles, who is at once more valiant than thou, and more dear to the
immortals? But retire whenever thou shalt be opposed to him, lest, even
contrary to fate, thou arrive at the habitation of Pluto. But when
Achilles shall have attained his death and destiny, then again, being
confident, fight among the front ranks, because no other of the Greeks
shall slay thee."

So saying, he left him there, when he had told him all, and immediately
afterwards dissipated the thick darkness from the eyes of Achilles, and
he then saw very clearly with his eyes; whereupon groaning, he addressed
his magnanimous soul:

"Ye gods! certainly I behold this, a great marvel with mine eyes. The
spear indeed lies upon the ground, nor do I at all perceive the man at
whom I hurled it, desiring to kill him. Undoubtedly Æneas, too, was dear
to the immortal gods, although I supposed that he boasted thus idly. Let
him go; there will be no spirit in him hereafter to make trial of me,
who even now rejoicing, has escaped from death. But come, having
encouraged the warlike Greeks, I will make trial of the other Trojans,
going against them."

He spoke, and sprang into the ranks, and cheered on every man:

"No longer now stand off from the Trojans, O noble Greeks, but on! let
man advance against man, and let him be eager to engage. Difficult is it
for me, although being valiant, to attack so many warriors, and to fight
with them all. Not even Mars, who is an immortal god, nor yet Minerva,
could charge and toil against the force of such a conflict. Yet whatever
I can do with hands, with feet, and with strength, I declare that I will
no longer be remiss, not ever so little; but I will go right through
their line, nor do I think that any Trojan will rejoice, whoever may
come near my javelin."

Thus he spoke, encouraging them; but illustrious Hector, upbraiding,
animated the Trojans, and said that he would go against Achilles:

"Ye magnanimous Trojans, fear not the son of Peleus. I, too, could fight
with words even with the immortals, but with the spear it is difficult,
for they are far more powerful. Nor shall Achilles give effect to all
his words; but one part he shall fulfil, and the other leave half
imperfect. Against him will I go, even though he were like to fire as to
his hands; and to shining iron, as to his might."

Thus he spoke, inciting them; but the Trojans opposite quickly raised
their spears; their strength was mingled together, and a shout arose.
Then also Phœbus Apollo, standing near, addressed Hector:

"Hector, do not at all fight in the van with Achilles, but receive him
in the crowd, and from the tumult, lest by any chance he hit thee, or
strike thee with the sword in close combat."

Thus he spoke, and Hector sunk back again into the thick body of men,
dismayed when he heard the voice of the god speaking. But Achilles
leaped among the Trojans, clad with courage as to his soul, shouting
dreadfully; and first slew gallant Iphition, son of Otrynteus, the
leader of many people, whom the nymph Naïs bore to Otrynteus, the sacker
of cities, under snowy Tmolus, in the rich district of Hyda.[664] Him,
eagerly rushing straight forward, noble Achilles struck with his
javelin in the middle of the head; and it was entirely split in two. He
gave a crash as he fell, and noble Achilles boasted over him:

   [Footnote 664: A town of Mæonia in Lydia. See Steph. Byz. s. v.]

"O son of Otrynteus, most terrible of all men, thou liest; death is here
upon thee. Thy birth, however, is at the Gygæan lake, where is thy
paternal land, beside fishy Hyllus, and eddying Hermus."

Thus he spoke, boasting; but darkness covered his (Iphition's) eyes, but
the horses of the Greeks tore him with the tires of the wheels in the
front ranks. After him Achilles smote Demoleon, son of Antenor, a brave
repeller of the fight, in the temples, through his brazen-cheeked
helmet. Nor indeed did the brazen casque resist it, but through it the
eager javelin broke the bone, and the whole brain within was defiled;
and he subdued him, ardent. Next he wounded with his spear in the back,
Hippodamas, as he was leaping down from his chariot, while flying before
him. But he breathed out his soul, and groaned, like as when a bull,
dragged round the Heliconian king,[665] bellows, as the youths drag him;
and the earth-shaker is delighted with them: so, as he moaned, his
fierce soul left his bones. But he went with his spear against godlike
Polydorus,[666] the son of Priam; but him his father did not permit to
fight, because he was the youngest among all, and dearest to him, and
surpassed all in speed. Then, indeed, through youthful folly, exhibiting
the excellence of his speed, he ran among the front ranks till he lost
his life. Him noble swift-footed Achilles smote rushing by, in the
middle of the back, where the golden rings of his belt clasped together,
and the doubled corslet met. Right through at the navel pierced the
point of the spear, and uttering a groan, he fell upon his knees; a
black cloud enveloped him, and stooping down, he gathered his intestines
in his hands. But when Hector perceived his brother Polydorus holding
his intestines in his hands, and rolled on the earth, a darkness was
immediately poured over his eyes, nor could he any longer be employed
afar off, but advanced towards Achilles, like unto a flame, brandishing
his sharp spear. On the other hand, Achilles, as soon as he saw him,
leaped up, and boasting, spoke:

   [Footnote 665: Neptune was a favourite god among the Ionians (cf.
   Müller, Dor. vol. i. p. 417), but derived this name from Helice,
   a town in the northern coast of the Peloponnese, out of which the
   principal Achæan families were driven by Tisamenus, whose tomb
   was shown there. See Müller, id. p. 74.]

   [Footnote 666: This is not the Polydorus of Virgil and Euripides,
   but the son of Laothoe, daughter of Altas, king of the Lelegans]

"Near is the man who has most stung my soul, who has slain my cherished
companion; no longer indeed let us dread each other through the
bridges[667] of war."

   [Footnote 667: See iv. 371.]

He spoke, and sternly regarding [him], addressed noble Hector:

"Come nearer, that thou mayest the sooner reach the end of death."

But him, not daunted, crest-tossing Hector addressed:

"O son of Peleus, do not expect to terrify me now like a little boy, at
least with words; since I myself also well know how to speak both
revilings and reproaches. I know that thou indeed art brave, and that I
am inferior to thee. But these things indeed are placed at the knees of
the gods, whether, although being inferior, I shall take away thy life,
striking thee with my spear, since my weapon also is sharp at the
point."

He spoke, and, brandishing, sent forth his spear; and Minerva with a
breath turned it back from glorious Achilles, having breathed very
gently; but it came back to noble Hector, and lay before his feet. But
Achilles, eager to slay him, rushed furiously on, shouting dreadfully;
but Apollo, as a god, very easily snatched him away, and covered him
with abundant haze. Thrice indeed swift-footed noble Achilles rushed on
with his brazen spear, and thrice he smote the deep haze. But when he
rushed on the fourth time, like unto a god, he, dreadfully chiding,
addressed to him winged words:

"Dog, now again hast thou escaped death. Assuredly evil came very near
thee, but Phœbus Apollo has now again preserved thee, to whom thou art
wont to pray, when going into the clang of spears. Yet will I certainly
finish thee, meeting thee hereafter, if indeed any of the gods be an
ally to me also. At present, however, I will go after others of the
Trojans, whomsoever I can."

So saying, he struck Dryops with his spear in the middle of the neck,
and he fell before his feet. Him then he left, and then detained
Demuchus, son of Philetor, brave and great, wounding [him] in the knee,
with his spear, whom then striking with his great sword, he deprived of
life. But attacking both, he pushed Laogonus and Dardanus, the sons of
Bias, from their chariot to the ground, wounding one with his spear, and
striking the other in close combat with his sword. Also Tros, the son of
Alastor, who came towards him, taking him by the knees, if on any terms
he would spare him, and dismiss him alive, nor slay him, taking pity on
their equal age: fool! who knew not that he would not be persuaded. For
he was by no means a tender-minded nor gentle man, but very ferocious.
He (Tros) indeed clasped his knees with his hands, desiring to
supplicate him, but he (Achilles) wounded him in the liver with his
sword; and his liver fell out, and the black blood from it filled his
bosom, and darkness veiled his eyes, wanting life. But standing near
Mulius, he smote him with his javelin on the ear, and immediately the
brazen blade went through the other ear. Then, with his large-hilted
sword, he smote Echeclus, son of Antenor, in the centre of the head, and
the whole sword became tepid with blood; but purple Death and violent
Fate seized his eyes. Then Deucalion, where the tendons of the elbow
unite, there he pierced him through his hand with his brazen spear; but
he, weighed down as to his hand, awaited him, perceiving death before
him. But he (Achilles) smiting his neck with his sword, knocked the head
off afar with its helmet, and the marrow sprang forth from the spine;
and Deucalion lay extended on the ground. Then he hastened to go towards
Rigmus, the renowned son of Pireus, who had come from fertile Thrace;
whom he smote in the middle with his javelin, and the brass was fixed in
his stomach; and he fell from his chariot: and Achilles wounded in the
back, with his sharp javelin, Areïthoüs, the attendant, while turning
back the steeds, and threw him from the chariot: and the horses were
thrown into confusion. And as the blazing fire burns through the deep
dells of a dry mountain, and the dense forest is consumed, and the wind
agitating, turns round the flame on all sides; thus he raged in every
direction with his spear, like unto a deity, following those that were
to be slain; and the black earth flowed with blood. As when any one
yokes broad fore-headed bulls to trample out white barley on the
well-levelled floor, and it easily becomes small beneath the feet of the
bellowing oxen; so the solid-hoofed horses, driven by magnanimous
Achilles, trod down together both corses and shields. And the whole
axletree beneath was polluted with gore, and the rings which were round
the chariot seat, which the drops from the horses' hoofs spattered, as
well as from the felloes. But the son of Peleus was eager to bear away
glory, and was polluted with gore as to his invincible hands.





                         BOOK THE TWENTY-FIRST.


                               ARGUMENT.

Having divided the Trojan army, Achilles drives one part towards the
city, and the other into the Xanthus, where he takes twelve youths
alive, in order to sacrifice them at the tomb of Patroclus. He then
slays Lycaon and Asteropæus, deriding the river-god, Xanthus, as unable
to aid his friends. The river endeavours to overwhelm him by the aid of
Simoïs, but Vulcan defends him from the danger. Single combats of the
gods then follow, but they afterwards retire to Olympus. Apollo then
leads Achilles away, assuming the form of Agenor, and the Trojans are
thus enabled to regain the city.


But when they at last reached the course of the fairly-flowing river,
the eddying Xanthus, which immortal Jove begat; there separating them,
he pursued some indeed through the plain towards the city, by the [same]
way that the Greeks, on the preceding day, being astounded, had fled,
when illustrious Hector raged. By that way were they poured forth
terrified; but Juno expanded a dense cloud before them, to check them:
but the other half were rolled into the deep-flowing river, with silver
eddies. But they fell in with a great noise; and the deep streams
resounded, and the banks around murmured; but they, with clamour, swam
here and there, whirled about in the eddies.[668] As when locusts,
driven by the force of fire, fly into the air, to escape to a river, but
the indefatigable fire, suddenly kindled, blazes, and they fall, through
terror into the water: thus, by Achilles, was the resounding river of
deep-eddied Xanthus filled promiscuously with horses and men. But the
Jove-sprung [hero] left his spear upon the banks, leaning against a
tamarisk; and he leaped in, like unto a god, having only his sword, and
meditated destructive deeds in his mind. And he smote on all sides, and
a shocking lamentation arose of those who were stricken by the sword,
and the water was reddened with blood. And, as when the other fish,
flying from a mighty dolphin, fill the inmost recesses of a
safe-anchoring harbour, frightened; for he totally devours whatever he
can catch; so the Trojans hid themselves in caves along the streams of
the terrible river. But he, when he was wearied as to his hands,
slaying, chose twelve youths alive out of the river, a penalty for dead
Patroclus, the son of Menœtius. These he led out [of the river],
stupified, like fawns. And he bound their hands behind them[669] with
well-cut straps, which they themselves bore upon their twisted tunics;
and gave them to his companions to conduct to the hollow ships. But he
rushed on again, desiring to slay.

   [Footnote 668: Virg. Æn. i. 118: "Apparent rari nantes in gurgite
   vasto." With the following description may be compared Æsch. Ag.
   670: Ὁρῶμεν ἀνθοῦν πέλαγος Αἰγαῖον νεκρῶν ἀνδρῶν Ἀχαίων ναυτικῶν
   τ' ἐρειπίων. Aristid. Panath. p. 142: Ὡς δὲ ἑώρα τὴν θάλατταν
   αἵματι καὶ ῥοθίῳ ῥέουσαν, καὶ πάντα νέκρων καὶ ναυαγίων μεστά.]

   [Footnote 669: As was customary with captives. Cf. Virg. Æn. ii.
   57, and Moll. on Longus, ii. 9.]

Then did he encounter the son of Dardanian Priam, Lycaon, escaping from
the river, whom he himself had formerly led away, taking him unwilling
from his father's farm, having come upon him by night: but he, with the
sharp brass, was trimming a wild fig-tree of its tender branches, that
they might become the cinctures of a chariot. But upon him came noble
Achilles, an unexpected evil; and then, conveying him in his ships, he
sold him into well-inhabited Lemnos; but the son of Jason gave his
price.[670] And from thence his guest, Imbrian Eëtion, ransomed him, and
gave him many things, and sent him to noble Arisbe; whence, secretly
escaping, he reached his father's house. Returning from Lemnos, for
eleven days he was delighted in his soul, with his friends; but on the
twelfth the deity again placed him in the hands of Achilles, who was
about to send him into the [habitation] of Hades, although not willing
to go. But when swift-footed, noble Achilles perceived him naked,
without helmet and shield, neither had he a spear, for all these,
indeed, he had thrown to the ground, for the sweat overcame him, flying
from the river, and fatigue subdued his limbs beneath; but [Achilles]
indignant, thus addressed his own great-hearted soul:

   [Footnote 670: _I.e._ purchase him as a slave.]

"O gods! surely I perceive this, a great marvel, with mine eyes.
Doubtless the magnanimous Trojans whom I have slain will rise again from
the murky darkness, as now this man has returned, escaping the merciless
day, having been sold in sacred Lemnos; nor has the depth of the sea
restrained him, which restrains many against their will. But come now,
he shall taste the point of my spear, that I may know in my mind, and
learn, whether he will in like manner return thence, or whether the
fruitful earth will detain him, which detains even the mighty."

Thus he pondered, remaining still; but near him came Lycaon, in
consternation, anxious to touch his knees; for he very much wished in
his mind to escape evil death and black fate. Meanwhile noble Achilles
raised his long spear, desiring to wound him; but he ran in under it,
and, stooping, seized his knees, but the spear stuck fixed in the earth
over his back, eager to be satiated with human flesh. But he, having
grasped his knees with one hand, supplicated him, and with the other
held the sharp spear, nor did he let it go; and, supplicating, addressed
to him winged words:

"O Achilles, embracing thy knees, I supplicate thee; but do thou respect
and pity me. I am to thee in place of a suppliant, to be revered, O
Jove-nurtured one! For with thee I first tasted the fruit of Ceres on
that day when thou tookest me in the well-cultivated field, and didst
sell[671] me, leading me away from my father and friends, to sacred
Lemnos; and I brought thee the price of a hundred oxen. But now will I
redeem myself, giving thrice as many. This is already the twelfth
morning to me since I came to Troy, having suffered much, and now again
pernicious fate has placed me in thy hands. Certainly I must be hated by
father Jove, who has again given me to thee. For my mother Laothoë, the
daughter of aged Altes, brought forth short-lived me, of Altes, who
rules over the warlike Lelegans, possessing lofty Padasus, near the
Satnio: and Priam possessed his daughter, as well as many others; but
from her we two were born, but thou wilt slay both. Him, godlike
Polydorus, thou hast subdued already among the foremost infantry, when
thou smotest him with the sharp spear, and now will evil be to me here;
for I do not think that I shall escape thy hands, since a deity has
brought me near thee. Yet another thing will I tell thee, and do thou
store it in thy mind. Do not slay me, for I am not of the same womb with
Hector, who killed thy companion, both gentle and brave." Thus then,
indeed, the noble son of Priam addressed him, supplicating with words;
but he heard a stern reply.

   [Footnote 671: Hesych. έρασας είςτο πέρας τῆς θαλάσσης
   διαπέρασας, έπώλησας. See Schol. on ver. 40.]

"Fool, talk not to me of ransom, nor, indeed, mention it. Before
Patroclus fulfilled the fatal day, so long to me was it more agreeable
in my mind to spare the Trojans, and many I took alive and sold. But now
there is not [one] of all the Trojans, whom the deity shall put into my
hands before Ilium, who shall escape death; but above all of the sons of
Priam. But die thou also, my friend; why weepest thou thus? Patroclus
likewise died, who was much better than thou. Seest thou not how great I
am? both fair and great; and I am from a noble sire, and a goddess
mother bore me; but Death and violent Fate will come upon thee and me,
whether [it be] morning, evening, or mid-day;[672] whenever any one
shall take away my life with a weapon, either wounding me with a spear,
or with an arrow from the string."

   [Footnote 672: See Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke; but his knees and dear heart were relaxed. He let go the
spear, indeed, and sat down, stretching out both hands. But Achilles,
drawing his sharp sword, smote [him] at the clavicle, near the neck. The
two-edged sword penetrated totally, and he, prone upon the ground, lay
stretched out, but the black blood flowed out, and moistened the earth.
Then Achilles, seizing him by the foot, threw him into the river, to be
carried along, and, boasting, spoke winged words:

"Lie there now with the fishes,[673] which, without concern, will lap
the blood of thy wound; nor shall thy mother[674] weep, placing thee
upon the funeral couch, but the eddying Scamander shall bear thee into
the wide bosom of the ocean. Some fish, bounding through the wave, will
escape to the dark ripple,[675] in order that he may devour the white
fat of Lycaon. Perish [ye Trojans], till we attain to the city of sacred
Ilium, you flying, and I slaughtering in the rear: nor shall the
wide-flowing, silver-eddying river, profit you, to which ye have already
sacrificed many bulls, and cast solid-hoofed steeds alive into its
eddies. But even thus shall ye die an evil death, until ye all atone for
the death of Patroclus, and the slaughter of the Greeks, whom ye have
killed at the swift ships, I being absent."

   [Footnote 673: Cf. Virg. Æn. x. 555, sqq.; Longus, ii. 20: Άλλὰ
   βορὰν [ύμᾶς] ίχθύων θήσω καταδύσας.]

   [Footnote 674: Cf. Soph. Electr. 1138, sqq. with my note.]

   [Footnote 675: _I.e._ the surface.]

Thus he spoke; but the River was the more enraged at heart, and revolved
in his mind how he might make noble Achilles cease from labour, and
avert destruction from the Trojans. But meanwhile the son of Peleus,
holding his long-shadowed spear, leaped upon Asteropæus, son of Pelegon,
desirous to kill him whom the wide-flowing Axius begat, and Peribœa,
eldest of the daughters of Accessamenus; for with her had the
deep-eddying river been mingled. Against him Achilles rushed; but he,
[emerging] from the river, stood opposite, holding two spears; for
Xanthus had placed courage in his mind, because he was enraged on
account of the youths slain in battle, whom Achilles had slain in the
stream, nor pitied them. But when they were now near, advancing towards
each other, him first swift-footed, noble Achilles addressed:

"Who, and whence art thou of men, thou who darest to come against me?
Truly they are the sons of unhappy men who encounter my might." Him
again the illustrious son of Pelegon addressed: "O magnanimous son of
Peleus, why dost thou ask my race? I am from fruitful Pæonia, being far
off, leading the long-speared Pæonian heroes; and this is now the
eleventh morning to me since I came to Troy. But my descent is from the
wide-flowing Axius, who pours the fairest flood upon the earth, he who
begat Pelegon, renowned for the spear; who, men say, begat me. But now,
O illustrious Achilles, let us fight."

Thus he spake, threatening: but noble Achilles raised the Pelian ash;
but the hero Asteropæus [took aim] with both spears at the same
time,[676] for he was ambidexter.[677] With the one spear he struck the
shield, nor did it pierce the shield completely through; for the gold
restrained it, the gift of a god; and the other slightly wounded him
upon the elbow of the right arm; and the black blood gushed out: but the
[spear passing] over him, was fixed in the earth, longing to satiate
itself with his body. But second Achilles hurled his straight-flying
ashen spear at Asteropæus, anxiously desiring to slay him. From him
indeed he erred, and struck the lofty bank, and drove the ashen spear up
to the middle in the bank. Then the son of Peleus, drawing his sharp
sword from his thigh, eagerly leaped upon him; but he was not able to
pluck out, with his strong hand, the ashen spear of Achilles, from the
bank. Thrice, indeed, he shook it, desiring to pluck it out, and thrice
he failed in strength. And the fourth time he had determined in his
mind, bending, to snap the ashen spear of Æacides; but Achilles first,
close at hand, took away his life with the sword; for he smote him upon
the belly at the navel, and all his bowels were poured out upon the
ground, and darkness veiled him, dying, as to his eyes. Then Achilles,
leaping upon his breast, despoiled him of his arms, and boasting, spoke:

   [Footnote 676: Ἁμαρτῇ is here an adverb.]

   [Footnote 677: Symmachus, Epist. ix. 105: "Pari nitore atque
   gravitate senatorias actiones et Romanæ rei monumenta limasti, ut
   plane Homerica appellatione περιδέξιον, id est, æquimanum, te
   esse pronunciem."]

"Lie so: it is a difficult thing for thee, though descended from a
River, to contend with the sons of the most mighty Saturnian [Jove].
Thou saidst thou wert of the race of a wide-flowing River, but I boast
myself to be of the race of mighty Jove. The hero ruling over many
Myrmidons begat me, Peleus, son of Æacus; but Æacus was from Jove;
wherefore Jove is more powerful than Rivers flowing into the sea, and
the race of Jove again is more powerful than that of a river. Besides, a
very great River is at hand to thee, if it can aught defend thee; but it
is not lawful to fight with Jove, the son of Saturn. With him neither
does king Acheloüs vie, nor the mighty strength of deep-flowing Oceanus,
from which flow all rivers, and every sea, and all fountains, and deep
wells; but even he dreads the bolt of the great Jove, and the dreadful
thunder, when it bellows from heaven."

He said, and plucked his brazen spear from the bank. But him he left
there, after he had taken away his life, lying in the sand, and the dark
water laved him. About him, indeed, the eels and fishes were busied,
eating [and] nibbling the fat around his kidneys. But he (Achilles)
hastened to go against the Pæonian equestrian warriors, who were already
turned to flight beside the eddying river, when they saw the bravest in
the violent conflict bravely subdued by the hands and sword of the son
of Peleus. Then he slew Thersilochus, Mydon, Astypylus, Mnesus,
Thrasius, Ænius, and Ophelestes. And now had swift Achilles slain even
more Pæonians, had not the deep-eddying River, enraged, addressed him,
likening itself to a man, and uttered a voice from its deep vortex:

"O Achilles, thou excellest, it is true, in strength, but thou doest
unworthy acts above [others], for the gods themselves always aid thee.
If indeed the son of Saturn has granted to thee to destroy all the
Trojans, at least having driven them from me, perform these arduous
enterprises along the plain. For now are my agreeable streams full of
dead bodies, nor can I any longer pour my tide into the vast sea, choked
up by the dead; whilst thou slayest unsparingly. But come, even cease--a
stupor seizes me--O chieftain of the people."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed:

"These things shall be as thou desirest, O Jove-nurtured Scamander. But
I will not cease slaughtering the treaty-breaking[678] Trojans, before
that I enclose them in the city, and make trial of Hector, face to face,
whether he shall slay me, or I him."

   [Footnote 678: Although this meaning of ύπερφίαλος is well suited
   to this passage, yet Buttmann, Lexil. p. 616, § 6, is against any
   such particular explanation of the word. See his whole
   dissertation.]

Thus speaking, he rushed upon the Trojans like unto a god; and the
deep-eddying River then addressed Apollo:

"Alas! O god of the silver bow, child of Jove, thou hast not observed
the counsels of Jove, who very much enjoined thee to stand by and aid
the Trojans, till the late setting evening[679] sun should come, and
overshadow the fruitful earth."

   [Footnote 679: Δείελος has been shown by Buttmann to be really
   the _afternoon_; but he observes, p. 223, that in the present
   passage, "it is not the Attic δείλη ὀψία, with which it has been
   compared, but by the force of δύων, the actual sunset of evening.
   The ὀψέ is therefore, strictly speaking, redundant, and appears
   to be used with reference only to the time past, something in
   this way: 'Thou shouldst assist the Trojans until the sun sinks
   late in the west.'"]

He spoke, and spear-renowned Achilles leaped into the midst, rushing
down from the bank. But he (the River) rushed on, raging with a swoln
flood, and, turbid, excited all his waves. And it pushed along the
numerous corpses, which were in him[680] in abundance, whom Achilles had
slain. These he cast out, roaring like a bull, upon the shore; but the
living he preserved in his fair streams, concealing them among his
mighty deep gulfs. And terrible around Achilles stood the disturbed
wave, and the stream, falling upon his shield, oppressed him, nor could
he stand steady on his feet. But he seized with his hands a thriving,
large elm; and it, falling from its roots, dislodged the whole bank, and
interrupted the beautiful streams with its thick branches, and bridged
over the river itself,[681] falling completely in. Then leaping up from
the gulf, he hastened to fly over the plain on his rapid feet,
terrified. Nor yet did the mighty god desist, but rushed after him,
blackening on the surface, that he might make noble Achilles cease from
toil, and avert destruction from the Trojans. But the son of Peleus
leaped back as far as is the cast of a spear, having the impetuosity of
a dark eagle, a hunter, which is at once the strongest and the swiftest
of birds. Like unto it he rushed, but the brass clanked dreadfully upon
his breast; but he, inclining obliquely, fled from it, and it, flowing
from behind, followed with a mighty noise. As when a ditch-worker leads
a stream of water from a black-flowing fountain through plantations and
gardens, holding a spade in his hands, and throwing out the obstructions
from the channel; all the pebbles beneath are agitated as it flows
along, and, rapidly descending, it murmurs down a sloping declivity, and
outstrips even him who directs it: so the water of the river always
overtook Achilles, though being nimble; for the gods are more powerful
than mortals. As often as swift-footed, noble Achilles attempted to
oppose it, and to know whether all the immortals who possess the wide
heaven put him to flight, so often did a great billow of the river,
flowing from Jove, lave his shoulders from above; whilst he leaped up
with his feet, sad in mind, and the rapid stream subdued his knees under
him, and withdrew the sand from beneath his feet. But Pelides groaned,
looking toward the wide heaven:

   [Footnote 680: _I.e._ in the river. One translator absurdly
   renders it "through him," _i.e._ through Achilles.]

   [Footnote 681: "The circumstance of a fallen tree, which is by
   Homer described as reaching from one of its banks to the other,
   affords a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander at the
   season when we saw it."--Wood on Homer, p. 328.]

"O father Jove, how does none of the gods undertake to save me,
miserable, from the river! Hereafter, indeed, I would suffer
anything.[682] But no other of the heavenly inhabitants is so culpable
to me as my mother, who soothed me with falsehoods, and said that I
should perish by the fleet arrows of Apollo, under the wall of the armed
Trojans. Would that Hector had slain me, who here was nurtured the
bravest; then a brave man would he have slain, and have despoiled a
brave man. But now it is decreed that I be destroyed by an inglorious
death, overwhelmed in a mighty river, like a swine-herd's boy, whom, as
he is fording it, the torrent overwhelms in wintry weather."

   [Footnote 682: _I.e._ grant that I may but escape a disgraceful
   death by drowning, and I care not how I perish afterwards. The
   Scholiast compares the prayer of Ajax in p. 647: Ἐν δὲ φάει καὶ
   ὄλεσσον. Cf. Æn, i. 100, sqq. Æsch. Choeph 340; Eur. Andr. 1184.]

Thus he spoke; but Neptune and Minerva, very quickly advancing, stood
near him (but in body they had likened themselves to men), and, taking
his hand in their hands, strengthened him with words. But to them
earth-shaking Neptune began discourse:

"O son of Peleus, neither now greatly fear, nor yet be at all dismayed;
so great allies from among the gods are we to thee, Jove approving it, I
and Pallas Minerva, so that it is not decreed that thou shouldst be
overcome by a river. It, indeed, shall soon cease, and thou thyself
shalt see it. But let us prudently suggest, if thou be obedient, not to
stop thy hands from equally destructive war, before thou shalt have
enclosed the Trojan army within the renowned walls of Troy, whoever,
indeed, can escape: but do thou, having taken away the life of Hector,
return again to the ships; for we grant to thee to bear away glory."

They indeed having thus spoken, departed to the immortals. But he
proceeded towards the plain (for the command of the gods strongly
impelled him), and it was all filled with the overflowed water. Much
beautiful armour and corpses of youths slain in battle, floated along;
but his knees bounded up against the course of it rushing straight
forward; for Minerva had put great strength into him. Nor did Scamander
remit his strength, but was the more enraged with the son of Peleus. And
he swelled the wave of the stream, and, shouting, animated Simoïs:

"O dear brother, let us both, at least, restrain the force of the man,
since he will quickly destroy the great city of king Priam, for the
Trojans resist him not in battle. But aid me very quickly, and fill thy
streams of water from thy fountains, and rouse all thy rivulets, raise a
great wave, and stir up a mighty confusion of stems and stones, that we
may restrain this furious man, who now already is victorious, and is
bent on deeds equal to the gods. For I think that neither his strength
will defend him, nor his beauty at all, nor those beautiful arms, which
shall lie everywhere in the very bottom of my gulf, covered with mud.
Himself also will I involve in sand, pouring vast abundant silt around
him; nor shall the Greeks know where to gather his bones, so much slime
will I spread over him. And there forthwith shall be[683] his tomb, nor
shall there be any want to him of entombing, when the Greeks perform his
obsequies."

   [Footnote 683: Observe the force of τετεύξεται.]

He spoke, and raging aloft, turbid, he rushed upon Achilles, murmuring
with foam, with blood, and with dead bodies. Immediately the purple
water of the Jove-descended river being raised up, stood, and seized the
son of Peleus. But Juno cried aloud, fearing for Achilles, lest the
mighty deep-eddying river should sweep him away; and immediately
addressed Vulcan, her beloved son:

"Arise, Vulcan, my son; for we supposed that eddying Xanthus was equally
matched in battle against thee; but give aid with all haste, and exhibit
thy abundant flame. But I will go to excite a severe storm of Zephyrus,
and rapid Notus from the sea, which bearing a destructive conflagration,
may consume the heads and armour of the Trojans. Do thou, therefore,
burn the trees upon the banks of Xanthus, and hurl at himself with fire,
nor let him at all avert thee by kind words or threats: neither do thou
previously restrain thy might; but when I, shouting, shall give the
signal, then restrain thy indefatigable fire."

Thus she spoke; but Vulcan darted forth his fierce-burning fire. First,
indeed, he kindled a fire in the plain, and burned many dead bodies,
which were in abundance, over it, whom Achilles had slain; so that the
whole plain was dried up, and the clear water restrained. And as when an
autumnal north wind immediately dries a newly-watered garden, and
gratifies him whoever cultivates it, so was the whole plain dried, and
it consumed the dead; whereupon he turned his all-resplendent flame
against the river. The elms were burned up, and the willows and
tamarisks; the lotus was consumed, and the rushes and reeds, which grew
in great abundance round the beautiful streams of the river. Harassed
were the eels and the fishes, which through the whirlpools, [and] which
through the fair streams dived here and there, exhausted by the breath
of the various artificer Vulcan. The might of the river was burnt up,
and he spake, and addressed him:

"None of the gods, O Vulcan, can oppose thee on equal terms, nor can I
contend with thee, thus burning with fire. Cease from combat, and let
noble Achilles instantly expel the Trojans from their city; what have I
to do with contest and assistance?"

He spoke, scorched; and his fair streams boiled up. As a caldron pressed
by much fire, glows, bubbling up within on all sides, while melting the
fat of a delicately-fed sow, whilst the dry wood lies beneath it; so
were his fair streams dried up with fire, and the water boiled; nor
could he flow on, but was restrained, and the vapour [raised] by the
might of crafty Vulcan harassed him. At length, supplicating much, he
addressed to Juno winged words:

"O Juno, why does thy son press upon my stream, to annoy [me] beyond
others? nor truly am I so much to blame as all the others, as many as
are assistants to the Trojans, But I will, however, desist, if thou
biddest it; and let him also cease; and I moreover will swear this, that
I never will avert the evil day from the Trojans, not even when all
burning Troy shall be consumed with destructive fire, and the warlike
sons of the Greeks shall burn it."

But when the white-armed goddess Juno heard this, she straightway
addressed her beloved son Vulcan: "Vulcan, my illustrious son, abstain;
for it is not fitting thus to persecute an immortal god for the sake of
mortals."

Thus she spoke; and Vulcan extinguished his glowing fire, and the
refluent water immediately lowered its fair streams. But when the might
of Xanthus was subdued, then indeed they rested; for Juno restrained
herself, though enraged.

Among the other gods, however, grievous, troublesome contention fell
out, and the inclination in their minds was borne in opposite
directions. They engaged with a great tumult, and the wide earth
re-echoed, and the mighty heaven resounded around. And Jove heard it,
sitting upon Olympus, and his heart laughed with joy, when he beheld the
gods engaging in contest. Then they did not long stand apart; for
shield-piercing Mars began, and rushed first against Minerva, holding
his brazen spear, and uttered an opprobrious speech:

"Why thus, O most impudent, having boundless audacity, dost thou join
the gods in battle? Has thy great soul incited thee? Dost thou not
remember when thou didst urge Diomede, the son of Tydeus, to strike me?
And taking the spear thyself, thou didst direct it right against me, and
didst lacerate my fair flesh. Now, therefore, I think that I will
chastise thee, for all that thou hast done against me."

So saying, he struck [her] on the fringed ægis, horrible, which not even
the thunderbolt of Jove will subdue; on it gore-tainted Mars smote her
with the long spear. But she, retiring, seized in her stout hand a stone
lying in the plain, black, rugged, and great, which men of former days
had set to be the boundary of a field.[684] With this she struck fierce
Mars upon the neck, and relaxed his knees. Seven acres he covered,
falling; as to his hair he was defiled with dust; and his armour rang
round him. But Pallas Minerva laughed, and, boasting over him, addressed
to him winged words:

   [Footnote 684: The student will find some rude representations of
   these boundary-stones at page 212, sqq. of Van Goes' edition of
   the Rei Agrimensoria scriptores.]

"Fool, hast thou not yet perceived how much I boast myself to be
superior, that thou opposest thy strength to me? Thus indeed dost thou
expiate the Erinnys of thy mother, who designs mischiefs against thee,
enraged because thou hast deserted the Greeks, and dost aid the
treaty-breaking Trojans."

Thus having spoken, she turned back her bright eyes. But Venus, the
daughter of Jove, taking him by the hand, led him away, groaning very
frequently; but he with difficulty collected his spirit. But when the
white-armed goddess Juno perceived him, immediately to Minerva she
addressed winged words:

"Alas! O child of aegis-bearing Jove, invincible, see how again she,
most impudent, leads man-slaughtering Mars through the tumult, from the
glowing battle. But follow."

Thus she spoke; but Minerva rushed after, and rejoiced in her mind; and
springing upon her, smote her with her stout hand on the breast, and
dissolved her knees and dear heart. Then both of them lay upon the
fruitful earth; but she, boasting over them, spoke winged words:

"Would that all, as many as are allies to the Trojans, when they fight
against the armed Greeks, were so bold and daring, as Venus came an
assistant to Mars, to oppose my strength; then had we long since ceased
from battle, having overthrown the well-built city of Ilium."

Thus she spoke; but the white-armed goddess Juno smiled. And the
earth-shaking king addressed Apollo:

"Phoebus, why do we two stand apart? Nor is it becoming, since the
others have begun. This would be disgraceful, if we return without fight
to Olympus, and to the brazen-floored mansion of Jove. Commence, for
thou art younger by birth; for it would not be proper for me, since I am
elder, and know more things. Fool, since thou possessest a senseless
heart; nor dost at all remember those things, how many evils we suffered
round Ilium, when we alone of the gods, coming from Jove to haughty
Laomedon, laboured for a year for a stipulated hire, and he, commanding,
gave orders? I indeed built a city and wall for the Trojans, extensive
and very beautiful, that the city might be impregnable; whilst thou, O
Phoebus, didst feed, his stamping-footed, curved-horned oxen, among the
lawns of many-valed, woody Ida.[685] But when now the jocund Hours had
brought round the period of payment, then did violent Laomedon forcibly
defraud us both of all reward, and having threatened, dismissed us. And
beside,[686] he threatened that he would bind our feet and hands from
above, and sell us into distant islands; and affirmed that he would cut
off the ears of both with the brass: but we immediately returned back
with indignant mind, enraged on account of the rewards which, having
promised, he did not make good. Is it for this thou dost now gratify the
people? Why dost thou not strive along with us, that the treaty-breaking
Trojans may basely perish from the root, with their children and
modest[687] wives?"

   [Footnote 685: On this slavery of Apollo, see my note, p. 43, n.
   2. Longus, Past. iv. 10: Εῖποτε Ἀπόλλων Λαομέδοντι θητεύων
   ἐβούκολησε, τοιόσδε ἦν, οἷος τότε ἐφάνθη Δάφνις.]

   [Footnote 686: Σὺν μὲν. I almost prefer σοὶ μὲν, with other MSS.
   and Clarke.]

   [Footnote 687: Perhaps intended as a covert sneer at Helen.]

But him the far-darting king, Apollo, in turn addressed:

"O Neptune, thou wouldst not say that I am prudent, if I should now
contend with thee, for the sake of miserable mortals, who, like the
leaves, are at one time very blooming, feeding on the fruit of the soil
and at another again, perish without life. Rather let us cease from
combat as soon as possible; and let them decide the matter themselves."

Thus having spoken, he turned himself back; for he was afraid to come to
strife of hands with his uncle. But him his sister, rustic Diana, the
mistress of wild beasts, harshly rebuked, and uttered this upbraiding
speech:

"Fliest thou, Far-darter? and hast thou yielded the whole victory to
Neptune? and dost thou give easy glory to him? O Fool, why in vain dost
thou hold an useless bow? No longer now shall I hear thee boasting in
the halls of our sire, as formerly amongst the immortal gods, that thou
wouldst fight in opposition to Neptune."

Thus she spoke; but her the far-darting Apollo by no means addressed.
But the venerable spouse of Jove, enraged, rebuked [her] who rejoices in
arrows, with reproaching words:

"How darest thou now, fearless wretch, stand against me? A difficult
match am I for thee to be opposed to my strength, although thou art a
bow-bearer; for Jove has made thee a lioness among women, and suffered
thee to kill whatever woman thou wilt. Certainly it is better to slay
wild beasts among the mountains, or rustic stags, than to fight bravely
with thy betters. But if thou desirest to have a knowledge of battle,
come on, that thou mayest well know how much the better I am; since thou
opposest strength to me."

She spoke, and with her left hand seized both her (Diana's) hands at the
wrist, and with her right plucked the bow[688] from her shoulders.
Smiling, she beat her about the ears with it, while she writhed herself;
and the fleet arrows fell out [of her quiver, as she moved]. Then the
goddess fled, weeping, like a dove which flies from a hawk to a hollow
rock, her hiding-place, (for neither was it fated that she should be
taken by it;) so she fled, weeping, and left her arrows there.

   [Footnote 688: I have followed Kennedy, who says: "The preferable
   meaning of τόξα is _arcus_. This Juno employs as an instrument of
   chastisement, to avoid the infliction of which, her antagonist
   turns from side to side, and whilst thus shifting her position
   lets fall her arrows, ὀϊστοί, ver. 492." Others by τόξα
   understood both bow and arrows.]

But the messenger [Mercury], the slayer of Argos, addressed Latona:

"O Latona, I will by no means fight with thee; for difficult indeed
would it be to combat with the wives of cloud-compelling Jove; but
rather, very forward among the immortal gods, boast that thou hast
conquered me by violent force."

Thus indeed he spoke; but Latona collected together the bent bow and the
arrows[689] which had fallen here and there amid the whirl of dust. She,
having taken the arrows, followed her daughter. But the daughter had
arrived at Olympus, and at the brazen-floored palace of Jove, and had
sat down at the knees of her father, weeping, whilst her ambrosial robe
trembled around; and her the Saturnian father drew towards him, and,
sweetly smiling, interrogated her:

"Which now of the heavenly inhabitants, my dear child, has rashly done
such things to thee, as if having done some evil openly?"

But him the fair-crowned mistress of the chase[690] addressed in turn:
"Thy spouse, the white-armed Juno, has injured me, O father, from whom
contention and strife await[691] the immortals."

   [Footnote 689: Τόξα here means both bow and arrows.]

   [Footnote 690: A more literal version would be, "the fair crowned
   mistress of the cry," i.e. the hunting cry.]

   [Footnote 691: Έφῆπται, "immitti solet."--Heyne. See D'Orville on
   Chariton, vii. 5, p. 582, ed. Lips.]

Thus they indeed spoke such things with one another. But Phoebus Apollo
came to sacred Ilium; for the wall of the well-built city was a care to
him, lest the Greeks, contrary to fate, should overthrow it that day.
The other ever-existing gods, however, repaired to Olympus, some indeed
indignant, but others greatly boasting. And they sat down beside their
father, the collector of dark clouds: but Achilles slew at once the
Trojans themselves, and their solid-hoofed steeds. And as when a smoke,
ascending from a burning city, reaches the wide heaven, but the wrath of
the gods has excited it; it creates toil to all, and sends griefs upon
many; so did Achilles cause toil and griefs to the Trojans.

Meanwhile aged Priam stood upon a lofty tower, and observed huge
Achilles: but by him the routed Trojans were easily thrown into
confusion, nor was there any might in them. Then groaning, he descended
from the tower to the ground, in order to direct the illustrious guards
at the gates along the wall:

"Hold the gates open in your hands until the people, flying, come into
the city, for Achilles is at hand routing them. Now I think that
destructive deeds will be. But, as soon as they revive, hemmed in within
the wall, put to again the well-fitted doors, for I tremble lest this
destructive man rush within the wall."

Thus he spoke; but they opened the gates and pushed back the bolts; and
they being opened, afforded safety. But Apollo leaped out to meet them,
that he might avert destruction from the Trojans. Then they, parched
with thirst, and covered with dust, fled from the plain directly towards
the city and the lofty wall; but he furiously pursued with his spear;
for fierce madness constantly possessed his heart, and he burned to bear
away glory. Then indeed the sons of the Greeks had taken lofty-gated
Troy, had not Phoebus Apollo excited noble Agenor, a hero, the son of
Antenor, both blameless and brave. And into his heart he threw courage,
and he himself stood beside him, leaning against a beech-tree, that he
might avert the heavy hands of death; but he was overshadowed by much
darkness. But he, when he perceived Achilles, the destroyer of cities,
stood still, and much his heart was darkened[692] as he remained; and
sighing, he thus addressed his own great-hearted soul:

"Alas, me! if indeed I fly from terrible Achilles, in the way by which
the others, routed, are flying, even thus will he seize me, and will
slay me unwarlike; but if I suffer these to be thrown into confusion by
Achilles, the son of Peleus, and fly in another direction on my feet
from the wall through the Ilian plain, until I reach the lawns of Ida,
and enter its thickets; then indeed, having bathed myself at evening in
the river, I may return back to Troy, cleansed from sweat. But why does
my mind commune these things? Truly he may observe me departing from the
city towards the plain, and, quickly pursuing, may overtake me on his
swift feet; then will it no longer be possible to escape Death and Fate;
for he is very powerful beyond all men. But if I go against him in front
of the city--for his body also is without doubt vulnerable by the sharp
brass, there is one soul in it, and men say that he is mortal; although
Jove, the son of Saturn, affords him glory."

So saying, gathering himself up,[693] he awaited Achilles; and his
valiant heart within him burned to combat and to fight. As a panther
advances from a deep thicket against a huntsman,[694] nor is aught
troubled in mind, nor put to flight, although it hears the yelling; and
although anticipating it, he may have wounded, or stricken it,
nevertheless, although pierced with a spear, it desists not from the
combat, till either it be engaged in close fight, or be subdued. Thus
noble Agenor, the son of renowned Antenor, would not fly till he had
made trial of Achilles; but, on the contrary, held before him his
shield, equal on all sides, and took aim at him with his spear, and
shouted aloud:

   [Footnote 692: Cf. Donalson on Soph. Antig. 20, where there is a
   similar use of καλχαίνειν. The present metaphor is taken from
   the troubled and darkling aspect of the sea before a storm.]

   [Footnote 693: Cf. xvi. 403, 714.]

   [Footnote 694: This pleonasm of ἀνὴρ is very common; ii. 474,
   ἄνδρες αἴπολιι; iv. 187, ἄνδρες χαλκῆες. Cf. iii. 170; xii. 41.
   So ἄνδρες πολῖται, Phlegon. Trall, p. 26. Ἄνδρες δημόται,
   Aristoph. Plut. 254. Ἀνὴρ βασιλεὺς, Palæphatus, 39. Ἀνὴρ
   οἰκονόμος, Manetho, iv. 610.]

"Certainly now thou art great in hopes in thy mind, O illustrious
Achilles, that thou wilt this day devastate the city of the magnanimous
Trojans. Fool! certainly many griefs will be effected over it, for in it
we are numerous and valiant men, who will defend Ilium for our beloved
parents, our wives, and our children. But thou shalt here fulfil thy
destiny, although being so terrible, and a daring warrior."

He spoke, and hurled the sharp javelin from his heavy hand, and struck
him in the shin below the knee, nor missed: but the greave of
newly-wrought tin around [it] horribly resounded; and the brazen weapon
recoiled from it stricken, nor penetrated: for the gifts of the god
prevented it. Then the son of Peleus next attacked godlike Agenor; nor
did Apollo permit him to obtain glory; but snatched him away, and
covered him with much haze; and sent him to return peacefully from the
battle.

But he by a stratagem averted the son of Peleus from the people; for the
Far-darter, having likened himself in every respect to Agenor, stood
before his feet; and he hastened to pursue him with his feet. Whilst he
was pursuing him, running before at a small interval, over the
corn-bearing plain, turned towards the deep-eddying river Scamander;
(for Apollo beguiled him by deceit, so that he always expected to
overtake him on his feet;) meanwhile the other Trojans being routed,
came delighted in a crowd to the city; and the city was full of them
shut in. Nor did they any longer dare to wait for each other without the
city and the wall, and to inquire who had escaped, and who had fallen in
the battle; but gladly they were poured into the city, whomsoever of
them the feet and knees preserved.




BOOK THE TWENTY-SECOND.


ARGUMENT.

Hector persists in remaining outside the walls, despite the entreaties
of his father. He flies thrice round Troy, fights, and is slain by
Achilles, who drags his body to the fleet at the wheels of his chariot.
The lamentations of his wife and parents follow.


Thus they, indeed, driven by fright through the city, like fawns, were
refreshing themselves from sweat, and were drinking and allaying their
thirst, leaning against the handsome battlements; but the Greeks were
coming near the wall, resting their shields upon their shoulders. But
Hector his destructive fate fettered to remain there, before Ilium and
the Scæan gates. And Phœbus Apollo thus addressed the son of Peleus:

"Why, O son of Peleus, dost thou pursue me, an immortal god, with swift
feet, thyself being a mortal? Nor yet hast thou at all discovered that I
am a god; but thou incessantly ragest. For certainly the labour of the
Trojans is not now a care to thee, whom thou hast routed, and who are
now enclosed within their city, while thou art turned aside hither.
Neither canst thou slay me, since I am not mortal."

But him swift-footed Achilles, greatly indignant,[695] addressed:

   [Footnote 695: Milton, P.L. ii. 708:--

                   --"On th' other side
         Incensed with indignation Satan stood
         Unterrified, and like a comet burn'd,
         That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
         In th' arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
         Shakes pestilence and war."]

"Thou hast injured me, O Far-darter, most destructive of all gods,
having now turned me away hither from the wall; certainly many had now
seized the earth with their teeth, before they had arrived at Ilium. But
now hast thou deprived me of great glory, and hast preserved them
easily, for thou didst not at all dread vengeance after. Certainly I
would punish thee, if the power at least were mine."

Thus saying, he went towards the city greatly elate, hastening like a
steed which bears away the prize, with his chariot, which striving hard,
runs swiftly over the plain. So Achilles briskly moved his feet and his
knees.

But him aged Priam first beheld with his eyes, rushing over the plain,
all shining like a star which rises in autumn; and its resplendent rays
shine among many stars in the depth of the night, which by name they
call the dog of Orion. Very bright indeed is this, but it is a baleful
sign, and brings violent heat upon miserable mortals. So shone the brass
round the breast of him running. But the old man groaned, and smote his
head with his hands, raising them on high,[696] and, groaning, he cried
out greatly, supplicating his dear son. But he stood before the Scæan
gates, insatiably eager to fight with Achilles; but the old man
piteously addressed him, stretching out his hands:

   [Footnote 696: On this gesture of grief, see Gorius, Monum.
   Columb. p. 12.]

"O Hector, do not, my beloved son, await this man alone, without others;
lest that thou shouldst speedily draw on fate, subdued by the son of
Peleus; since he is much more powerful. Cruel! would that he were [only]
as dear to the gods as he is to me; quickly then would the dogs and
vultures devour him lying low; surely sad grief would then depart from
my heart. He who has made me deprived of many and brave sons, slaying,
and selling them into far-distant islands. For even now the Trojans
being shut up in the city, I cannot see my two sons, Lycaon and
Polydorus, whom Laothoë bore to me, queen among women. But if indeed
they live at the camp, surely we will afterwards redeem them with brass
and with gold; for it is within; for aged Altes, renowned by fame, gave
many things to his daughter. But if they are already dead, and in the
mansions of Hades, grief will be to my soul, and to their mother, we who
gave them birth. But to the other people the grief will be shorter, if
thou shouldst not die, subdued by Achilles. But come inside the wall, O
my son, that thou mayest save the Trojan men and women, nor afford great
glory to the son of Peleus, and thou thyself be deprived of thy dear
life. Moreover, pity me, wretched, yet still preserving my senses,[697]
unhappy, whom the Saturnian sire will destroy by grievous fate, upon the
threshold of old age, having seen many evils,[698] my sons slain, my
daughters dragged captives, their chambers plundered, and my infant
children dashed upon the earth in dire hostility, and my
daughters-in-law torn away by the pernicious hands of the Greeks. And
myself perhaps the last--the raw-devouring dogs, whom I have nourished
in my palaces, the attendants of my table, the guards of my portals,
will tear at the entrance of the gates,[699] after some one, having
stricken or wounded me with the sharp brass, shall take away my soul
from my limbs; and who, drinking my blood, will lie in the porch,
infuriated in mind. To a young man, indeed, slain in battle, lacerated
with the sharp brass, it is altogether becoming to lie, for all things
are honourable to him dead, whatever may appear; but when dogs dishonour
the grey head, the hoary beard, and privy members of an old man slain,
that is indeed most pitiable among wretched mortals."

   [Footnote 697: _I.e._ alive. Cf. xxiii.]

   [Footnote 698: On the proverbial woes of Priam, cf. Aristotle
   Eth. i. 9, 10; and Ennius, fragm. Andromach. p. 236--9, with the
   notes of Columna, ed. Hessel.]

   [Footnote 699: Cf. Virg. Æn. ii. 550, sqq., who has imitated this
   passage in his description of the death of Priam.]

The old man spoke, and tore out the hoary locks with his hands, plucking
them from his head; nor did he persuade the mind of Hector. But his
mother, then on the other side, wailing, shed tears, laying bare her
bosom, whilst with the other hand she laid forth her breast; and
shedding tears, addressed to him winged words: "O Hector, my son,
reverence these things, and pity me myself. If ever I afforded thee the
grief-lulling breast, remember these things, O dear son; and being
within the wall, repel [this] hostile man; nor stand a foremost
adversary to him. Wretched one! for if he shall slay thee, neither shall
I mourn thee on the couch, my dear offspring, whom I myself brought
forth, nor will thy rich-dowered wife; but far away from us both, the
swift dogs will devour thee at the ships of the Greeks."

Thus weeping, they twain addressed their dear son, supplicating him
much; nor did they persuade the mind of Hector; but he awaited huge
Achilles, coming near. And as a fierce serpent at its den, fed on evil
poisons, awaits[700] a man, but direful rage enters it, and it glares
horribly, coiling itself around its den; so Hector, possessing
inextinguishable courage, retired not, leaning his splendid shield
against a projecting tower; but, indignant, he thus addressed his own
great-hearted soul:[701]

"Ah me, if indeed I enter the gates and the wall, Polydamas will first
cast reproach upon me,[702] he who advised me to lead the Trojans
towards the city in this disastrous night, when noble Achilles arose to
battle. But I did not obey; certainly it would have been much better.
And now, since by my injurious obstinacy I have destroyed the people, I
fear the Trojan men, and the long-robed Trojan women, lest some one
inferior to me should say, 'Hector, relying on his own strength, has
destroyed the people.' Thus will they say; but it would have been far
better for me, slaying Achilles in the encounter,[703] to return, or
gloriously to be slain by him for the city. But if now I shall lay down
my bossed shield and stout helmet, and, resting my spear against the
wall, I myself going, shall come before renowned Achilles, and promise
that we will give to the Atrides to lead away Helen, and all the
numerous possessions along with her, whatever Paris brought to Troy in
his hollow barks, and who was the origin of the contention, and at the
same time that we will divide others, as many as this city contains,
among the Greeks,--but again I should exact an oath from the elders of
the Trojans,[704] that they would conceal nothing, but divide all things
into two portions, whatever treasure this delightful city contains
within it. Yet why does my soul discuss such things? [I dread] lest I,
going, should reach him, but he pity me not, nor at all respect me, but
slay me, being thus naked, as a woman, after I have put off my armour.
Nor, indeed, is it now allowed to converse with him from an oak, or from
a rock, as a virgin and a youth; a virgin and youth converse with one
another. But it is better to engage him in strife; that as soon as
possible we may know to which, indeed, the Olympian [Jove] will give
glory."


   [Footnote 700: Hesych. χειά' ή κατάδυσις των οφεων και
   δρακόντων.]

   [Footnote 701: Milton, P.L. νi. III:--

          "Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood
          Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,
          And thus his own undaunted heart explores."]

   [Footnote 702: Cf. Aristot. Eth. iii. 8, and Casaub. on Pers.
   Sat. i. 4. "Ne mihi Polydamas, et Troiades Labeonem
   Prætulerint."]

   [Footnote 703: Αντην.]

   [Footnote 704: This is perhaps the easiest way of expressing
   γερούσιον öορκον. It means an oath to be solemnly kept, an oath
   to which the elders might with propriety pledge themselves.]

Thus he pondered, remaining; but near him came Achilles, like unto the
helmet-shaking warrior, Mars, brandishing upon his right shoulder the
dreadful Pelian ash; but the brass shone around, like unto the splendour
either of a blazing fire, or of the rising sun. Then, as tremor seized
Hector, he perceived him, nor could he remain there any longer, but he
left the gates behind him, and fled affrighted; but the son of Peleus
rushed on, trusting to his swift feet. As a falcon in the mountains, the
swiftest of birds, easily dashes after a timid pigeon; she, indeed,
flies away obliquely; but he, close at hand, shrilly screaming,
frequently assails, and his spirit orders him to seize her: thus, eager,
he flew right on; but Hector fled in terror under the wall of the
Trojans, and moved his fleet limbs. Then they rushed by the
prospect-ground and the wind-waving fig-tree, always under the wall
along the public way, and reached the two fair-flowing springs, where
the two springs of the eddying Scamander rise. The one, indeed, flows
with tepid water, and a steam arises from it around, as of burning fire;
whilst the other flows forth in the summer time, like unto hail, or cold
snow, or ice from water. There, at them, are the wide, handsome stone
basins, where the wives and fair daughters of the Trojans used to wash
their splendid garments formerly in time of peace, before the sons of
the Greeks arrived. In this direction they ran past [the one] flying,
but the other pursuing from behind. A brave man, indeed, fled before,
but a much braver swiftly pursued him; since they did not seek to obtain
a victim or a bull's hide, such as are the rewards of men for speed, but
they ran for the life of horse-breaking Hector. And as when
prize-winning[705] solid-hoofed steeds ran very swiftly round the
course, and a great reward is proposed, either a tripod, or a woman [in
honour] of a deceased hero; so they thrice made the circuit of the city
of Priam with their swift feet: and all the gods beheld. Then to them
the father of men and gods commenced an address:

   [Footnote 705: _I.e._ race horses.]

"Alas! certainly I behold with mine eyes a beloved hero pursued round
the wall; and my heart is grieved on account of Hector, who has
sacrificed many thighs of oxen to me, upon the tops of many-valed Ida,
and at other times again in the highest [places of] the city; but now,
indeed, noble Achilles pursues him, on swift feet, around the city of
Priam. But come, deliberate, O ye gods, and consider, whether we shall
preserve him from death, or shall subdue him now, being brave [at the
hands of] Achilles, the son of Peleus."

But him the blue-eyed goddess Minerva then addressed:

"O father, hurler of the white thunder, [collector] of dark clouds, what
a word hast thou spoken! Dost thou wish to liberate from sad death a
man, being mortal, long ago destined to fate? Do it: but all we, the
other gods, will not assent to thee."

Her, then, the cloud-compelling Jupiter, answering, addressed: "Take
courage, Tritonia, beloved child: I by no means speak with serious mind,
but I wish to be mild to thee. Do as is the inclination, nor delay at
all."

Thus speaking, he incited Minerva, already prepared; and, springing
forth, she descended down from the heights of Olympus.

But swift Achilles pursued Hector, incessantly pressing upon him. And as
when a dog pursues the fawn of a deer in the mountains, having roused it
from its lair, through both glens and thickets; and, although
panic-stricken, it crouches down beneath a brake; yet tracking it, he
runs continually on until he finds it; so Hector eluded not the
swift-footed son of Peleus. As often as he would rush against the
Dardanian gates, towards under the well-built towers, if perchance they
might aid him with missile weapons from above, so often, previously
anticipating him, he turned him away towards the plain; whilst he
himself always flew on the side of the city. And as in a dream one
cannot pursue a fugitive; neither can the one escape the other, nor the
other pursue: so the one could not overtake the other in his speed, nor
the other escape him. But how, then, could Hector have escaped the fates
of death, if Apollo had not, for the very last time, met him, who
aroused for him his courage and swift knees? But noble Achilles nodded
to the people with his head, nor permitted them to cast their bitter
weapons at Hector, lest some one, wounding him, should obtain the glory,
and he himself come second. But when for the fourth time they arrived at
the fountains, then, indeed, the Sire raised aloft his golden scales,
and placed in them the two fates of death, bearing long sleep, this of
Achilles, but that of horse-breaking Hector. Holding them by the middle,
he poised them, and the fatal day of Hector inclined and sunk to Hades;
but Phœbus Apollo left him.

Then the blue-eyed goddess Minerva approached the son of Peleus, and,
standing near, addressed to him winged words:

"Now, O illustrious Achilles, dear to Jove, I hope that we two shall
bear back great glory to the Greeks at the ships, having slain Hector,
although being insatiate of war. Now, certainly, it is no longer
possible for him to escape us, not even if far-darting Apollo should
toil much, throwing himself at the feet of the ægis-bearing father Jove.
But do thou now stand and revive; but I, approaching with thee, will
persuade him to engage thee face to face."

Thus spoke Minerva; but he obeyed, and rejoiced in his mind; and stood,
leaning upon his ashen, brass-pointed spear. But she then left him, and
overtook noble Hector, likening herself to Deïphobus, unwearied in her
body and voice; and, standing near, she addressed to him winged words:
"O brother dear, certainly swift Achilles now greatly presses on thee,
pursuing thee with rapid feet round the city of Priam. But come now, let
us stand, and, awaiting, repulse him."

But her mighty crest-tossing Hector in turn addressed:

"Deïphobus, surely thou wert ever before by far the dearest to me of my
brothers, the sons whom Hecuba and Priam produced. But now I think in my
mind that I honour thee still more, since thou hast dared for my sake,
when thou dost behold [me] with thine eyes, to come out of the city;
while others remain within."

But him the azure-eyed goddess Minerva in turn addressed:

"My brother dear, my father and venerable mother indeed greatly
supplicated me, by turn embracing my knees and my companions around, to
remain there (so much do all tremble with fear); but my mind within was
harassed with sad grief. But now let us forthwith eagerly engage, nor
let there any longer be a sparing of our spears, that we may know
whether Achilles, having slain us both, shall bear our bloody spoils to
the hollow barks, or be subdued by thy spear."

Thus having spoken, Minerva also with deception led on. But when they
were near advancing towards each other, him mighty crest-tossing Hector
first addressed:

"No longer, O son of Peleus, will I fly thee as before. Thrice have I
fled round the great city of Priam, nor ever dared to await thee coming
on; but now my mind urges me to stand against thee: certainly I shall
slay, or be slain. But come, let us attest the gods; for they will be
the best witnesses and observers of agreements. For neither will I
cruelly insult thee, if indeed Jove shall give me the victory, and I
take away thy life; but after I shall despoil thy beautiful armour, O
Achilles, I will give back thy body to the Greeks; and so also do thou."

But him swift-footed Achilles sternly regarding, addressed:

"Talk not to me of covenants, O most cursed Hector. As there are not
faithful leagues between lions and men, nor yet have wolves and lambs an
according mind,[706] but ever meditate evils against each other; so it
is not possible for thee and me to contract a friendship, nor shall
there at all be leagues between us,--first shall one, falling, satiate
the invincible warrior Mars with his blood. Call to mind all thy valour;
now it is very necessary for thee to be both a spearman and a daring
warrior. Nor is there any longer any escape for thee, for Pallas Minerva
at once subdues thee beneath my spear, and thou shalt now pay for all
the accumulated sorrows of my companions, whom thou hast slain, raging
with the spear."

   [Footnote 706: See Duport, p. 127; and cf. Hor. Epod. iv. 1.]

He spoke, and brandishing it, sent forth his long-shadowed spear, and
illustrious Hector, seeing it opposite, avoided it; for, looking before
him, he sunk down, and the brazen spear passed over him, and was fixed
in the earth. But Pallas Minerva plucked it out, and gave it back to
Achilles, and escaped the notice of Hector, the shepherd of the people.
Then Hector addressed the illustrious son of Peleus:

"Thou hast erred, O godlike Achilles, nor art thou yet acquainted with
my fate from Jove; certainly thou didst say so, but thou art a prater,
and very subtle in words, in order that, dreading thee, I may be
forgetful of my strength and courage. But not in my back, whilst flying,
shalt thou thrust thy spear, but shalt drive it through my breast,
rushing right on, if God grants this to thee. But now in turn avoid my
brazen spear! would that thou mightst now receive it all in thy body.
Then truly would the war become lighter to the Trojans, thou being
slain; for thou art the greatest bane to them."

He spoke, and, brandishing, sent forth his long-shadowed spear, and
struck the centre of Pelides' shield, nor missed; but the spear was
repelled far away from the shield. But Hector was enraged because his
swift weapon had fled in vain from his hand; and stood dejected, for he
had not another ashen spear. Then he called upon the white-shielded
Deïphobus, greatly shouting, [and] he asked him for a long spear; but he
was not near him; and Hector perceived in his mind, and said:

"Alas! without doubt, now the gods have summoned me to death. For I
indeed thought the hero Deïphobus was by my side; but he is within the
wall, and Minerva has deceived me. But now is evil death near me, nor
far away, neither is there escape. Certainly this long since was more
agreeable to Jove and to the far-darting son of Jove, who formerly,
propitious, preserved me; but now, on the contrary, Fate overtakes me.
Nevertheless I will not perish cowardly and ingloriously at least, but
having done some great deed to be heard of even by posterity."

Thus having spoken, he drew his sharp sword, which hung below his loins,
both huge and strong, and, with collected might, rushed forward, like a
lofty-soaring eagle, which swoops to the plain through the gloomy
clouds, about to snatch either a tender lamb, or a timid hare; thus
Hector rushed forward, brandishing his sharp sword. Achilles also rushed
on, and filled his soul with fierce rage. He sheltered his breast in
front with his shield, beautiful, curiously wrought and nodded with his
shining helmet, four-coned; but the beautiful golden tufts, which Vulcan
had diffused in great abundance round the cone, were shaken. As the star
Hesperus, which is placed the brightest star in heaven,[707] proceeds
amongst other stars in the unseasonable time of night, so it shone from
the well-sharpened spear which Achilles, designing mischief to noble
Hector, brandished in his right hand, eyeing his fair person, where it
would best yield. But the beautiful brazen armour, of which he had
despoiled great Patroclus, having slain him, covered the rest of his
body so much; yet did there appear [a part] where the collar-bones
separate the neck from the shoulders, and where the destruction of life
is most speedy. There noble Achilles, eager, drove into him with the
spear, and the point went out quite through his tender neck. However the
ash, heavy with brass, did not cut away the windpipe, so that, answering
in words, he could address him. But he fell in the dust, and noble
Achilles vaunted over him:

"Hector, thou didst once suppose, when spoiling Patroclus, that thou be
safe, nor dreaded me, being absent. Fool! for I apart, a much braver
avenger of him, was left behind at the hollow ships, I who have relaxed
thy knees. The dogs, indeed, and birds shall dishonourably tear thee,
but the Greeks shall perform his funeral rites."

But him crest-tossing Hector, growing languid, then addressed:

"I supplicate thee by thy soul, thy knees, thy parents, suffer not the
dogs to tear me at the ships of the Greeks; but do thou indeed receive
brass in abundance, and gold, which my father and venerable mother will
give thee; and send my body home, that the Trojans and wives of the
Trojans may make me, dead, partaker of a funeral pyre." [708]

   [Footnote 707: Milton, P.L. v. 166:--

        "Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
        If better thou belong not to the dawn."]

   [Footnote 708: Cf. Æn. x. 903; xii. 930, sqq.]

But him swift-footed Achilles, sternly regarding, addressed;

"Dog, supplicate me not by my knees, nor by my parents; for would that
my might and mind in any manner urge me myself, tearing thy raw flesh to
pieces, to devour it, such things hast thou done to me. So that there is
not any one who can drive away the dogs from thy head, not even if they
should place ten-fold and twenty-times such ransoms, bringing them
hither, and even promise others; not even if Dardanian Priam should wish
to compensate for thee with gold:[709] not even thus shall thy venerable
mother lament [thee] whom she has borne, having laid thee upon a bier,
but dogs and fowl shall entirely tear thee in pieces."

But him crest-tossing Hector, dying, addressed:

"Surely well knowing thee, I foresaw this, nor was I destined to
persuade thee; for truly within thee there is an iron soul. Reflect now,
lest to thee I be some cause of the wrath of the gods, on that day when
Paris and Phœbus Apollo[710] shall kill thee, though being brave, at the
Scæan gates."

As he spoke thus, the end of death overshadowed him; and his soul flying
from his limbs, descended to Hades, bewailing its destiny, relinquishing
vigour and youth. But him, although dead, noble Achilles addressed:

"Die: but I will then receive my fate whensoever Jove may please to
accomplish it,[711] and the other immortal gods."

He spoke, and plucked the spear from the corpse; and then laid it aside,
but he spoiled the bloody armour from his shoulders. But the other sons
of the Greeks ran round, who also admired the stature and wondrous form,
of Hector;[712] nor did any stand by without inflicting a wound. And
thus would some one say, looking to his neighbour: "Oh, strange! surely
Hector is now much more gentle to be touched, than when he burned the
ships with glowing fire."

   [Footnote 709: _I.e._ to give thy weight in gold. Theognis, 77:
   Πιστὸς ἀνὴρ χρυσοῦ τε καὶ άργύρου άντερύσασθαι Ἄξιος.]

   [Footnote 710: Grote, vol. i. p. 406, observes: "After routing
   the Trojans, and chasing them into the town, Achilles was slain
   near the Skæan gate by an arrow from the quiver of Paris,
   directed under the unerring auspices of Apollo," referring to
   Soph. Phil. 334; Virg. Æn. vi. 56.]

   [Footnote 711: "I have conversed with some men who rejoiced in
   the death or calamity of others, and accounted it as a judgment
   upon them for being on the other side, and against them in the
   contention: but within the revolution of a few months, the same
   man met with a more uneasy and unhandsome death; which when I
   saw, I wept, and was afraid; for I knew that it must be so with
   all men; for we also die, and end our quarrels and contentions by
   passing to a final sentence."--Taylor, Holy Dying, i. p. 305, ed.
   Bohn.]

   [Footnote 712: Herodot. ix. 25: Ὁ δὲ νεκρὸς ἔην θέης ἄξιος
   μεγάθεος εἵνεκα κα κάλλεος.]

Thus would some one say, and, standing by, would wound him. But
swift-footed Achilles, after he had despoiled him, standing amongst the
Greeks, spoke winged words:

"O friends, leaders and princes of the Greeks, since the gods have
granted us to subdue this hero, he who did as many mischiefs, as did not
all the others together; come! let us make trial round the city with our
arms, that we may learn concerning the Trojans, what mind they have;
whether they are about to desert the citadel, he being slain, or intend
to remain, Hector being no more. But why does my mind within me
deliberate these things? Patroclus lies at the ships, an unwept,
unburied corse; and him I shall never forget, as long as I am amongst
the living, and my dear knees move for me; and though they forget the
dead in Hades, yet will I remember my beloved comrade even there. But
come now, ye youths of the Greeks, singing a pæan,[713] let us return to
the hollow ships, and let us bring him; we bear back great glory: we
have slain noble Hector, whom the Trojans, throughout the city,
worshipped as a god."

He spoke, and was meditating unseemly deeds against noble Hector. He
perforated the tendons of both his feet behind, from the heel to the
instep, and fastened in them leather thongs, and bound him from the
chariot; but left his head to be trailed along. Then ascending his
chariot, and taking up the splendid armour, he lashed (the horses) to go
on, and they, not unwilling, flew. But the dust arose from him while
trailed along, and his azure locks around approached [the ground],[714]
and his entire head, once graceful, lay in the dust; for Jupiter had
then granted to his enemies, to dishonour him in his own father-land.
Thus indeed his whole head was denied with dust; but his mother plucked
out her hair, and cast away her shining veil, and wept very loudly,
having beheld her son. And his dear father groaned piteously, and all
the people around were occupied in wailing and lamentation through the
city; and it was very like to this, as if all Ilium, from its summit,
were smouldering in fire. With difficulty indeed did the people detain
the old man, indignant with grief anxious to rush out from the Dardanian
gates: for rolling in the mud, he was supplicating all, addressing each
man by name:

   [Footnote 713: "This hymn consisted in a repetition, cf. v. 393,
   4, which Quintus Smyrnæus has imitated in Ιδ. 117, and Abronius
   Silo translated ap. _Senec. Suas_. c. 2. The most ancient hymn of
   this kind on record is that in the first book of Samuel, xviii.
   7."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 714: Supply οὔδει or κονίη.]

"Desist, my friends, and permit me alone, grieved as I am, going out of
the city, to approach the ships of the Greeks. I will supplicate this
reckless, violent man, if perchance he may respect my time of life, and
have compassion on my old age; for such is his father Peleus to him, he
who begat and nurtured him a destruction to the Trojans; but
particularly to me above all has he caused sorrows. For so many blooming
youths has he slain to me, for all of whom I do not lament so much,
although grieved, as for this one, Hector, keen grief for whom will bear
me down even into Hades.[715] Would that he had died in my hands; for
thus we should have been satisfied, weeping and lamenting, both his
unhappy mother who bore him, and I myself." Thus he spoke, weeping, but
the citizens also groaned. But among the Trojan dames, Hecuba began her
continued lamentation:

   [Footnote 715: "Then shall ye bring down my grey hairs with
   sorrow to the grave." --Genes, xlii. 38.]

"O my son, why do wretched I live, having suffered grievous things, thou
being dead? Thou who by night and day wast my boast throughout the town,
and an advantage to the Trojan men and women throughout the city, who
received thee as a god. For assuredly thou wast a very great glory to
them when alive now, on the contrary, death and fate possess thee."

Thus she spoke, weeping; but the wife of Hector had not yet learned
anything: no certain messenger going, informed her that her husband had
remained without the gates; but she was weaving a web in a retired part
of her lofty house; double, splendid, and was spreading on it various
painted works.[716] And she had ordered her fair-haired attendants
through the palace, to place a large tripod on the fire, that there
might be a warm bath for Hector, returning from the battle. Foolish! nor
knew she that, far away from baths, azure-eyed Minerva had subdued him
by the hands of Achilles. But she heard the shriek and wailing from the
tower, and her limbs were shaken, and the shuttle fell from her to the
ground; and immediately she addressed her fair-haired attendants:

   [Footnote 716: Ποικίλματα is similarly used in vi. 294.]

"Come hither, let two follow me, that I may see what deeds have been
done. I heard the voice of my venerable mother-in-law, and to myself the
heart within my breast leaps up to my mouth, and the limbs under me are
benumbed. Surely some evil is now near the sons of Priam. O that the
word may be [far] from my ear! I dread lest brave Achilles, having
already cut off noble Hector alone from the city, may drive him towards
the plain, and even now have made him desist from the fatal valour which
possessed him; for he never remained among the throng of warriors, but
leaped out far before, yielding in his valour to none."

Thus having spoken, she rushed through the palace like unto one
deranged, greatly palpitating in heart; and her attendants went along
with her. But when she reached the tower and the crowd of men, she stood
looking round over the wall, and beheld him dragged before the city; but
the fleet steeds drew him ruthlessly towards the ships of the Greeks.
Then gloomy night veiled her over her eyes, and she fell backwards, and
breathed out her soul in a swoon. But from her head fell the beautiful
head-gear, the garland, the net, and the twisted fillet, and the veil
which golden Venus had given to her on that day when crest-tossing
Hector led her from the palace of Eëtion, after he had presented many
marriage-gifts. Around her in great numbers stood her sisters-in-law and
sisters, who supported her amongst them, seized with stupor unto
death.[717] But when she again revived, and her soul was collected in
her breast, sobbing at intervals, she spoke among the Trojan dames:

   [Footnote 717: See Kennedy: ὥστε is to be understood before
   ἀπολέσθαι.]

"Hector, O wretched me! then we were both born to a like fate, thou
indeed in Troy, in the mansion of Priam, but I in Thebe, beneath woody
Placus, in the palace of Eëtion; who, himself ill-fated, reared me,
ill-fated, being yet a little child;--would that he had not begotten me!
Now, however, thou goest to the mansions of Hades beneath the recesses
of the earth, but leavest me, in hateful grief, a widow in the dwelling;
and thy boy, yet such an infant, to whom thou and I unfortunate gave
birth; nor wilt thou be an advantage to him, O Hector, for thou art
dead; nor he to thee. For even if he shall escape the mournful war of
the Greeks, still will labour and hardship ever be to him hereafter;
for others will deprive him of his fields by changing the landmarks. But
the bereaving day renders a boy destitute of his contemporaries; he is
ever dejected, and his cheeks are bedewed with tears. The boy in want
shall go to the companions of his father, pulling one by the cloak,
another by the tunic; and some of these pitying, shall present him with
a very small cup; and he shall moisten his lips, but not wet his palate.
Him also some one, enjoying both [parents],[718] shall push away from
the banquet, striking him with his hands, and reviling him with
reproaches: 'A murrain on thee! even thy father feasts not with us.'
Then shall the boy Astyanax return weeping to his widowed mother,--he
who formerly, indeed, upon the knees of his own father, ate marrow
alone, and the rich fat of sheep; but when sleep came upon him, and he
ceased childishly crying, used to sleep on couches in the arms of a
nurse, in a soft bed, full as to his heart with delicacies. But now,
indeed, Astyanax,[719] whom the Trojans call by surname (because thou
alone didst defend their gates and lofty walls for them), shall suffer
many things, missing his dear father. But now shall the crawling worms
devour thee, naked, at the curved ships, far away from thy parents,
after the dogs shall have satiated themselves: but thy robes, fine and
graceful, woven by the hands of women, lie in thy palaces. Truly all
these will I consume with burning fire, being of no use to thee, for
thou wilt not lie on them; but let them be a glory [to thee] before the
Trojans and the Trojan dames."

Thus she spoke, weeping, and the females also mourned.

   [Footnote 718: Ἀμφιθαλὴς παῖς ὸ ἀμφοτέρωθεν θάλλων, ἤγουν ᾦ ἄμφω
   οὶ γovεῖς περίεισι.]

   [Footnote 719: Playing on the signification of the name,--"king
   of the city." This piece of twaddle has not been omitted by Plato
   in his ridiculous Cratylus.]




                        BOOK THE TWENTY-THIRD.


                               ARGUMENT.

Achilles, admonished in a dream by the ghost of his friend, celebrates
the funeral of Patroclus.


Thus they indeed were mourning through the city; but the Greeks, as soon
as they reached the ships and the Hellespont, were separated each to his
own ship. But Achilles did not permit the Myrmidons to be dispersed, but
he spoke amongst his warlike companions [thus]:

"Ye swift-horsed Myrmidons, comrades dear to me, let us not yet loose
the solid-hoofed steeds from under our chariots, but with the very
horses and chariots, going near, let us bewail Patroclus; for this is
the honour of the dead. But when we have indulged[720] sad lamentation,
unyoking our steeds, we will all sup here."

Thus he spoke; but they mourned in a body; and Achilles led the way.
Thrice they drove their fair-maned steeds around the body,[721]
grieving; and among them Thetis kindled a longing for lamentation.
Moistened were the sands, and moistened were the arms of the men with
tears; for so brave a master of the flight they longed. But among them
the son of Peleus led the abundant lamentation, laying his
man-slaughtering hands upon the breast of his companion:

   [Footnote 720: Excellently paraphrased by Gaza: Ἐπειδὰν δὲ τοῦ
   ὄλεθρίου θρήνου ἀπολαύσωμεν. Ernesti well observes that
   τεταρπώμεσθα implies "delight mingled with satiety."]

   [Footnote 721: This was a frequent rite at funerals. Cf. Apollon.
   Rh. i. 1059; Virg. Æn. xi. 188, sqq.; Heliodor. Ethiop. iii. p.
   136: Ἐπειδὴ τὸ μνῆμα τοῦ Νεοπτολέμου περιεστοιχήσατο ἡ πομπὴ, καὶ
   τρίτον οἱ ἔφηβοι τὴν ἵππον περιήλασαν, ὠλολύξαν μὲν αἱ γυναῖκες,
   λάλαξαν δὲ οἱ ἄνδρες. Among the Romans this rite was called
   _decursio_. Cf. Liv. xxv. 17: Tacit. Ann. ii. 7; Sueton. Claud. §
   i. According to Plutarch, Alexander the Great performed the same
   honours at the tomb of Achilles, that Achilles had bestowed upon
   the manes of his friend Patroclus. See also Bernart on Stat.
   Theb. vi. 217.]

"Hail! O Patroclus, even in the dwellings of Hades; for now shall I
accomplish all those things which formerly I promised, that having
dragged Hector hither, I would give him to the dogs to be devoured raw;
and that before thy pile I would cut the necks of twelve illustrious
sons of the Trojans, enraged on account of thee slain."

He spoke, and meditated unworthy deeds against noble Hector, having
stretched him prone in the dust before the bier of Menœtiades; but they
each stripped off his brazen, glittering armour, and unyoked their
high-sounding steeds. They sat also in crowds at the ship of
swift-footed Æacides; but he afforded to them an agreeable funeral
feast.[722] Many white bulls[723] were stretched around by the axe,
having their throats cut, and many sheep and bleating goats. Many
white-tusked swine also, abounding in fat, were extended for roasting in
the flame of Vulcan; and on every side around the dead body flowed
abundant blood. But the chiefs of the Greeks led the king, the
swift-footed son of Peleus, to noble Agamemnon, hardly persuading him
enraged at heart on account of his companion. But when advancing they
reached the tent of Agamemnon, he straightway ordered the clear-voiced
heralds to place a large tripod on the fire, if he could persuade the
son of Peleus to wash away the bloody gore. But he sternly refused, and
besides swore an oath:[724]

   [Footnote 722: Τάφος· τὸ γινόμενον περίδειπνον ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν
   κατοιχομένων τιμῇ.--Hesych.]

   [Footnote 723: On these funeral sacrifices, see Comm. on Æn. xi.
   l. c.; and Lomeier de Lustrationibus, § xxxi.]

   [Footnote 724: Buttm. Lexil. p. 436, after insisting strongly on
   the _personification_ of Ὅρκος, observes on this passage: "I see
   no reason why we should not suppose that in the poet's mind
   Jupiter was put in opposition to ὅρκον, exactly in the same sense
   as ὄρκος is actually found in opposition to Ζεύς in Pindar, Pyth.
   iv. 297. Κάρτερος ὅρκος ἄμμι μάρτυς ἔστω Ζεὺς ὁ γενέθλιος
   άμφοτέροις. Further, the expressions μέγας όρκος, κάρτερος ὅρκος
   suit much better the idea of the witness or pledge of the oath,
   than they do the oath itself."]

"No, by Jove, who is both the supreme and the best of gods, it is not
lawful that ablutions should come near my head, before I place Patroclus
on the pile, and have thrown up a mound, and shorn my hair; for not to
such a degree will sorrow a second time invade my heart, whilst I am
among the living. But nevertheless let us now yield to the loathsome
banquet. But on the morrow, O king of men, Agamemnon, give orders to
bring wood, and dispose it so as is proper that a dead body enjoying it,
should descend beneath the obscure darkness; so that the indefatigable
fire may consume him very quickly from our eyes, and the people may
return to their occupations."

Thus he spoke; but they indeed readily listened to him, and obeyed. Then
they, each sedulously preparing supper, feasted; nor did their mind lack
aught of an equal feast. But when they had dismissed the desire of food
and drink, some departed in order to lie down, each to his tent. But the
son of Peleus, on the contrary, amid his many Myrmidons, lay near the
shore of the far-sounding sea, heavily moaning, in a clear spot, where
the waves plashed against the shore; when sweet[725] sleep, diffused
around, took possession of him, relaxing the cares of his mind; for he
was very much fatigued as to his fair knees, chasing Hector at
wind-swept Ilium. But to him came the spirit of wretched Patroclus, like
unto him in all things, as to bulk, and beautiful eyes, and his voice;
and like garments also were around his body; and he stood over his head,
and addressed him:

"Sleepest thou, O Achilles, and art thou forgetful of me? Thou didst not
indeed neglect me when alive, but [now that I am] dead. Bury me, that I
may as soon as possible pass the gates of Hades. The spirits, the images
of the deceased,[726] drive me far away, nor by any means permit me to
be mingled with them beyond the river; but thus I do wander round the
ample-gated dwelling of Hades. But give me thy hand,[727] I beseech
thee, for I shall not again return from Hades after thou hast made me a
partaker of the fire. For by no means shall we, being alive, sitting
apart from our dear companions, deliberate counsels; but the hateful
fate which befel me when born, has snatched me away. And to thyself
also, O godlike Achilles, thy fate is to perish beneath the wall of the
noble Trojans. But another thing I bid, and will command, O Achilles, if
thou wilt obey, not to lay my bones apart from thine; but as we were
nurtured together in thy palaces, when Menœtius led me from Opus, a
little boy, to thy home, on account of a melancholy homicide, on that
day when, imprudent, I slew the son of Amphidamas, not wishing it,
enraged about the dice:[728] then Peleus received me in his abode,
carefully reared me, and named me thy attendant. So may the same tomb
contain our bones, the golden vase which thy venerable mother gave
thee."

   [Footnote 725: On the epithet νήδνμος, cf. Buttm. p. 414, sqq.]

   [Footnote 726: Buttm. Lexil. p. 372, in a very interesting
   discussion, regards καμόντες as an euphemism, "by which the dead,
   whom we consider as still acting and feeling, and consequently as
   the objects of our kind offices, of which they are conscious, are
   represented as still living in another state, but deprived of
   their earthly powers."]

   [Footnote 727: Virg. Æn. vi. 370: "Da dextram misero."]

   [Footnote 728: See the Quaint remarks of Jeremy Taylor, Holy
   Living, p. 224, ed. Bohn.]

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed:

"Why, O venerable friend, hast thou come to me, and commandest each of
these things to me? Yet will I readily accomplish all these things for
thee, and obey as thou commandest. But stand nearer to me, that
embracing each other even for a little while, we may indulge in sad
lamentation."

Thus then having spoken, he stretched out with his friendly arms, nor
caught him;[729] for the spirit went gibbering[730] beneath the earth,
like smoke. Then Achilles sprang up astonished, and clapped together his
hands, and spoke this doleful speech:

"Alas! there is indeed then, even in the dwellings of Hades, a certain
spirit and image, but there is no body[731] in it at all; for all night
the spirit of miserable Patroclus stood by me, groaning and lamenting,
and enjoined to me each particular, and was wonderfully like unto
himself."

   [Footnote 729: Cf. Georg. iv. 499; Æn. ii. 790, iv. 276; Lucan,
   iii. 34.]

   [Footnote 730: See Odyss. xxiv. sub init, where the same word is
   applied to the shades of the suitors of Penelope.]

   [Footnote 731: By φρένες we may understand the power of using
   reason and judgment, with Duport, Gnom. p. 128, and Jeremy
   Taylor, Holy Dying, p. 524, ed. Bohn. But ver. 100 seems to
   require the interpretation which I have followed; Clarke
   rendering it "præcordia."]

Thus he spoke; and excited among them all a longing for lamentation; and
rosy-fingered Morn appeared to them while weeping around the miserable
corpse. But king Agamemnon incited everywhere from the tents both mules
and men to bring wood; and for this a brave man was roused, Meriones,
the servant of valour-loving Idomeneus. And they went, holding in their
hands wood-lopping axes and well-twisted ropes; and before them went the
mules. They passed over many ascents,[732] descents, and straight ways
and crossways. But when they reached the forests of many-rilled Ida,
hastening, they cut down the towering oaks with the keen-edged brass.
These greatly resounding, fell; and the Greeks then splitting them, tied
[them] upon the mules, but they pained the ground with their hoofs,
eager to reach the plain through the close thickets. But all the
wood-cutters carried trunks of trees, for so Meriones, the servant of
valour-loving Idomeneus, ordered; and afterwards threw them in order
upon the shore, where Achilles designed a mighty tomb for Patroclus, and
for himself.

But when they had thrown on all sides immense quantities of wood,
remaining there in a body, they sat down; but Achilles immediately
ordered the warlike Myrmidons to gird on the brass, and to yoke each his
horses to his chariot; but they arose, and were arrayed in their armour.
And both the combatants and the charioteers ascended their chariots; the
cavalry indeed first, but a cloud of infantry followed after in myriads;
and in the midst his companions bore Patroclus. They covered all the
dead body over with hair, which, cutting off,[733] they threw upon it;
but noble Achilles held his head behind, grieving, for he was sending a
blameless companion to Hades.

   [Footnote 732: A most remarkable and beautiful example of the
   appropriation of sound to sense. Pope has admirably imitated the
   original by the following translation:--

       "O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks, they go."

   Cowper less successfully:--

                 "They measured hill and dale,
       Right onward now, and now circuitous."

   Cf. Milton, P.L. ii. 948:--

           "So eagerly the fiend
   O'er bog, or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
   With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
   And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."]

   [Footnote 733: So in Senec. Hippol. 1176, "Placemus umbras,
   capitis exuvias cape, laceræque frontis accipe abscissam comam."
   The custom is learnedly illustrated by Bernart on Stat. Theb. vi.
   195, Lomeier de Lustrat. § xxv.]

But they, when they reached the place where Achilles pointed out to
them, laid him down; and immediately heaped on abundant wood for him.
Then again swift-footed Achilles remembered another thing. Standing
apart from the pile, he cut off his yellow hair, which he had nurtured,
blooming, for the river Sperchius;[734] and, moaning, he spake, looking
upon the dark sea:

   [Footnote 734: On this custom, cf. Schol. Hesiod. Theog. 348:
   Ἀπόλλωνι καὶ ποταμοῖς οὶ νέοι ἀπέτεμον τὰς κόμας, διὰ τὸ αύξήσεως
   καὶ ἀνατροφῆς αἰτίους εἷναι. See Lindenbrog on Censorin. de Die
   Nat. i. p. 6, and Blomf. on Æsch. Choeph. s. init., with my own
   note. Statius, Achill. i. 628, "Quærisne meos, Sperchie, natatus,
   Promissasque comas?" Cf. Pausan. i. 43, 4; Philostrat. Her. xi.]

"In vain, O Sperchius, did my father Peleus vow to thee, that I,
returning to my dear native land, should there cut off my hair for thee,
and offer a sacred hecatomb; and besides, that I would in the same place
sacrifice fifty male sheep at the fountains, where are a grove and
fragrant altar to thee. Thus the old man spake, but thou hast not
fulfilled his will. And now, since I return not to my dear fatherland, I
will give my hair to the hero Patroclus, to be borne [with him]." Thus
saying, he placed his hair in the hands of his dear companion; and
excited amongst them all a longing for weeping. And the light of the sun
had certainly set upon them, mourning, had not Achilles, standing
beside, straightway addressed Agamemnon:

"O son of Atreus (for to thy words the people of the Greeks most
especially hearken), it is possible to satiate oneself even with
weeping;[735] but now do thou dismiss them from the pile, and order them
to prepare supper. We, to whom the corpse is chiefly a care, will labour
concerning these things; but let the chiefs remain with us."

But when the king of men, Agamemnon, heard this, he immediately
dispersed the people among the equal ships; but the mourners remained
there, and heaped up the wood. They formed a pile[736] a hundred feet
this way and that, and laid the body upon the summit of the pile,
grieving at heart.

   [Footnote 735: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 25. "Achilles speaks of the
   expediency of terminating the lamentations of the army at large,
   and leaving what remains to be performed in honour of the
   deceased to his more particular friends."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 736: In illustration of the following rites, cf. Virg.
   Æn. iii. 62; v. 96; vi. 215; x. 517; xi. 80, 197, sqq.; and the
   notes of Stephens on Saxo Grammat. p. 92.]

Many fat sheep, and stamping-footed, bent-horned oxen, they skinned and
dressed before the pile; from all of which magnanimous Achilles, taking
the fat, covered over the dead body [with it] from head to feet, and
heaped around the skinned carcases. Leaning towards the bier, he
likewise placed vessels of honey and oil,[737] and, sighing deeply,
hastily threw upon the pyre four high-necked steeds. There were nine
dogs, companions at the table of the [departed] king, and, slaying two
of them, he cast them upon the pile; also twelve gallant sons[738] of
the magnanimous Trojans, slaying them with the brass; and he designed
evil deeds in his mind. Next he applied to it the iron strength of fire,
that it might feed upon it: then he groaned aloud, and addressed his
beloved companion by name:[739]

   [Footnote 737: Cf. Alcæus apud Brunck, Ann. i. p. 490: Καὶ τάφον
   ὑψώσαντο, γάλακτι δὲ ποιμένες αἰγῶν Ἔῤῥαναν ξανθῷ μιξάμενοι
   μέλιτι. Compare the similar libations to the dead in Eur. Orest.
   114; Heliodor. Eth. vi.; Apul. Met. 3; Stat. Theb. vi. 209; Virg.
   Æn. iii. 66.]

   [Footnote 738: This cruel custom was in vogue amongst the
   followers of Odin. See Olaus Magnus, iii. 3, and Mallet, Northern
   Antiquities, p. 213, sq., ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 739: On this προσφώνησις, or last address to the
   deceased, see my note on Eurip. Alcest. 625, t. i. p. 231, ed.
   Bohn; and Suppl. 773, 804; Virg. Æn. iii. 68, v. 79; Propert. i.
   17; Auson. Parent. 159, 10.]

"Hail! O Patroclus, even in the dwellings of Hades: for I now fulfil all
things which I formerly promised thee; twelve brave sons of the
magnanimous Trojans, all these, along with thee, shall the fire consume;
but I will not suffer Hector, the son of Priam, to be devoured by fire,
but by the dogs."

Thus he spoke, threatening; but about him the dogs were not busied; for
Venus, the daughter of Jove, drove off the dogs both days and nights,
and anointed him with a rosy unguent, ambrosial, that he might not
lacerate him dragging him along. Over him also Phœbus Apollo drew a dark
cloud from heaven to the plain, and overshadowed the whole space, as
much as the dead body occupied, lest the influence of the sun should
previously dry the body all around, with the nerves and limbs.

Yet the pile of dead Patroclus burnt not. Then again noble Achilles
meditated other things. Standing apart from the pile, he prayed to two
winds, Boreas and Zephyrus, and promised fair sacrifices; and, pouring
out many libations with a golden goblet, he supplicated them to come,
that they might burn the body with fire as soon as possible, and the
wood might hasten to be burned. But swift Iris, hearing his prayers,
went as a messenger to the winds. They, indeed, together at home with
fierce-breathing Zephyrus, were celebrating a feast, when Iris,
hastening, stood upon the stone threshold. But when they beheld her with
their eyes, they rose up, and invited her to him, each of them. But she,
on the contrary, refused to sit down, and spoke [this] speech:

"No seat [for me]; for I return again to the flowings of the ocean, to
the land of the Æthiopians, where they sacrifice hecatombs to the
immortals, that now I, too, may have a share in their offerings. But
Achilles now supplicates Boreas, and sonorous Zephyrus, to come, that ye
may kindle the pile to be consumed, on which lies Patroclus, whom all
the Greeks bewail."

She, indeed, thus having spoken, departed; but they hastened to go with
a great tumult, driving on the clouds before them. Immediately they
reached the sea, blowing, and the billow was raised up beneath their
sonorous blast: but they reached the very fertile Troad, and fell upon
the pile, and mightily resounded the fiercely-burning fire. All night,
indeed, did they together toss about the blaze of the pyre, shrilly
blowing; and all night swift Achilles, holding a double cup, poured wine
upon the ground, drawing it from a golden goblet, and moistened the
earth, invoking the manes of wretched Patroclus. And as a father mourns,
consuming the bones of his son, a bridegroom who, dying, has afflicted
his unhappy parents, so mourned Achilles, burning the bones of his
companion, pacing pensively beside the pile, groaning continually. But
when Lucifer arrived, proclaiming light over the earth, after whom
saffron-vested Morn is diffused over the sea, then the pyre grew
languid, and the flame decayed; and the Winds departed again, to return
home through the Thracian sea; but it (the sea) groaned indeed, raging
with swelling billow.

But Pelides, going apart[740] from the pile, reclined fatigued, and upon
him fell sweet sleep. The others, however, were assembling in crowds
round the son of Atreus, the noise and tumult of whom, approaching,
awoke him; and, being raised up, he sat, and addressed them:

   [Footnote 740: On λιάζομαι, cf. Buttm. Lex. p. 404.]

"O son of Atreus, and ye other chiefs of the Greeks, first, indeed,
extinguish the whole pile, as much as the fire has seized, with dark
wine; and then let us collect the bones of Patroclus, the son of
Menœtius, well discriminating them (for they are readily distinguished;
for he lay in the centre of the pyre, but the others, both horses and
men, were burned promiscuously at the extremity), and let us place them
in a golden vessel, and with a double [layer of] fat, till I myself be
hidden in Hades. And I wish that a tomb should be made, not very large,
but of such[741] a size as is becoming; but do ye, O Achæans, hereafter,
make it both broad and lofty, you who may be left behind me at the
many-benched barks."

Thus he spoke; and they obeyed the swift-footed son of Peleus. First of
all, indeed, they totally extinguished the pyre with dark wine, as much
as the fire had invaded, and the deep ashes fell in; and, weeping, they
collected the white bones of their mild companion into a golden vessel,
and a double [layer of] fat; then, laying them in the tent, they covered
them with soft[742] linen. Next they marked out the area for the tomb,
and laid the foundations around the pile; and immediately upraised a
mound of earth; and, heaping up the tomb, returned. But Achilles
detained the people there, and made the wide assembly sit down; but from
the ships he brought forth prizes, goblets, tripods, horses, mules, and
sturdy heads of oxen, and slender-waisted women, and hoary[743] iron.
First he staked as prizes for swift-footed steeds, a woman to be borne
away, faultless, skilled in works, as well as a handled tripod of
two-and-twenty measures, for the first; but for the second he staked a
mare six years old, unbroken, pregnant with a young mule; for the third
he staked a fireless tripod, beautiful, containing four measures, yet
quite untarnished;[744] for the fourth he staked two talents of gold;
and for the fifth he staked a double vessel, untouched by the fire.
Erect he stood, and spoke this speech to the Greeks:

   [Footnote 741: Ernesti considers that τοῖον is here added to
   indicate _magnitude_, and Heyne accordingly renders it:
   "magnitudine fere hac," the speaker being supposed to use a
   gesture while thus speaking.]

   [Footnote 742: See Buttm. Lexil. pp. 236--9.]

   [Footnote 743: "Ernesti conceives that the colour is here
   maintained to express, not merely the _shining aspect_, but the
   newness of the metal; as λενκὸν in 268. This is ingenious; but
   why not receive it as expressive of colour, and borrowed from
   that to which the metal itself supplies a well-known epithet,
   viz., the hair of age?"--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 744: Αὕτως here designates "_that which is original,
   unchanged_, in opposition to common changes, λενκὸν ἔθ΄ αὕτως,
   still in _that_ its original state, completely unblackened with
   fire; and ω. 413; of the body of Hector, ἀλλ' ἔτε κεῖνος κεῖται.
   Αὕτως, in _that_ state in which he was before, still free from
   corruption."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 173.]

"O son of Atreus, and ye other well-greaved Greeks, these prizes lie in
the circus, awaiting the charioteers. If now, indeed, in honour of
another, we Grecians were contending, then truly would I, receiving,
bear the first [prizes] to my tent. For ye know how much my steeds
surpass in excellence; for they are both immortal, and Neptune gave them
to my father Peleus, who, again, delivered them to me. But nevertheless
I and my solid-hoofed steeds will remain apart [from the contest];
because they have lost the excellent might of such a charioteer, who
very often poured the moist oil over their manes, having washed them
with limpid water. They, indeed, standing, lament him, but their manes
hang down upon the ground, and they stand, grieved at heart. However, do
ye others through the army prepare, whoever of the Greeks confides in
his steeds and well-fastened chariots."

Thus spoke the son of Peleus; but the swift charioteers arose. But, far
the first, arose Eumelus, king of men, the dear son of Admetus, who
surpassed in equestrian skill. After him arose the son of Tydeus,
valiant Diomede, and led under the yoke the horses of Tros, which he
formerly took from Æneas; but Apollo preserved himself[745] alive; next
to whom arose the most noble son of yellow-haired Atreus, Menelaus, and
led beneath the yoke fleet steeds, Agamemnon's mare Æthe, and his own
stallion, Podargus. Her Echepolus, the son of Anchises, had presented
as a gift to Agamemnon, that he need not follow him to wind-swept Ilium,
but staying there might be delighted; for Jove had given him great
wealth, and he dwelt in wise Sicyon. Her, persevering in the race, he
led under the yoke. But Antilochus, the fourth, harnessed his
beautiful-maned steeds (the illustrious son of the magnanimous king
Nestor, the son of Neleus), and swift-footed Pelian-born steeds drew his
chariot for him; but his father, standing near, spoke for his good,
advising him, though himself prudent:

   [Footnote 745: Æneas.]

"O Antilochus, assuredly indeed both Jove and Neptune have loved thee,
although being young, and have taught thee all kinds of equestrian
exercise; wherefore there is no great need to instruct thee. For thou
knowest how to turn the goals with safety; but thy horses are very slow
to run, wherefore I think that disasters may happen. Their horses,
indeed, are more fleet, but they themselves know not how to manoeuvre
better than thou thyself. But come now, beloved one, contrive every
manner of contrivance in thy mind, lest the prizes by any chance escape
thee. By skill is the wood-cutter much better than by strength; and,
again, by skill the pilot directs upon the dark sea the swift ship,
tossed about by the winds; and by skill charioteer excels charioteer.
One man who is confident in his steeds and chariot, turns imprudently
hither and thither over much [ground], and his steeds wander through the
course, nor does he rein them in. But he, on the contrary, who is
acquainted with stratagem [though] driving inferior steeds, always
looking at the goal, turns it close, nor does it escape him in what
manner he may first turn [the course][746] with his leathern reins; but
he holds on steadily, and watches the one who is before him. But I will
show thee the goal, easily distinguished, nor shall it escape thy
notice. A piece of dry wood, as much as a cubit, stands over the ground,
either of oak or of larch, which is not rotted by rain; and two white
stones are placed on either side, in the narrow part of the way;[747]
but the racecourse around is level: either it is the monument[748] of
some man long since dead, or perhaps it has been a goal in the time of
former men, and now swift-footed noble Achilles has appointed it the
goal. Approaching this very closely, drive thy chariot and horses near;
but incline thyself gently towards the left of them (the steeds), in the
well-joined chariot-seat; and, cheering on the right-hand horse, apply
the whip, and give him the rein with thy hands. Let thy left-hand horse,
however, be moved close to the goal, so that the nave of the well-made
wheel may appear to touch, the top [of the post]; but avoid to touch
upon the stone, lest thou both wound thy horses, and break thy chariot
in pieces, and be a joy to the others, and a disgrace to thyself. But,
my beloved son, mind to be on thy guard; for if at the goal thou couldst
pass by in the course, there will not be one who could overtake thee in
pursuit, nor pass thee by; not if behind he drives noble Arion, the
swift steed of Adrastus,[749] which was from a god in race; or those of
Laomedon, which, excellent, have here been reared."

   [Footnote 746: Or "pull with his leathern reins."--Oxf. Transl.
   "τανύσῃ, viz. δρόμον σὺν ἱμᾶσιν. Thus τάθη δρόμος, ver. 375. The
   same ellipsis occurs in the following verse, in the case of ἔχει,
   which, however, admits also of the construction ἔχει ἑαυτόν, one
   usual in the latter language."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 747: "The old interpreter explained ἐν ξυνοχῇσιν ὁδοῦ,
   and I think correctly, of a wide track in the open plain becoming
   somewhat narrower at the point where the old monument stood; but
   ἀμφίς they took in the opposite sense of χωρίς, or still more
   forced. Heyne, however, understood it quite correctly of the wide
   plain around, which was so suited to a chariot-race, and within
   which, in the distance, stood also the mark chosen by Achilles,
   ver. 359. Others see in this passage the course winding round the
   monument; but then it must have been an old course regularly
   drawn out for the purpose; whereas this monument was selected by
   Achilles for the goal or mark quite arbitrarily, and by his own
   choice; and Nestor, ver. 332, only conjectures that it might have
   formerly served for a goal."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 95.]

   [Footnote 748: Such monumental stones were frequently placed in
   public places. Cf. Theocrit. vi. 10; Virg. Eel. ix. 55;
   Dicæarchus in Athen. xiii. p. 594.]

   [Footnote 749: According to many authors, this horse was produced
   from the earth by a stroke of Neptune's trident. See Serv. on
   Virg. Georg. i. 12; Pausan. viii. p. 650; Apollodor. iii. 6, 8;
   and Bernart. on Stat. Theb. iv. 43.]

Thus speaking, Neleian Nestor sat down again in his own place, when he
had mentioned the most important points of each matter to his son; and
Meriones, fifth, harnessed his beautiful-maned steeds. Then they
ascended their chariots, and cast lots into [the helmet]. Achilles
shook, and the lot of Antilochus, son of Nestor, leaped forth; after him
king Eumelus was allotted; but after him spear-renowned Menelaus, son of
Atreus, and Meriones was allotted to drive after him. But the son of
Tydeus, by far the bravest, was allotted to drive his coursers last.
Then they stood in order; and Achilles pointed out the goals,[750] far
off in the level plain; and near it placed godlike Phoenix as an umpire,
the armour-bearer of his own sire, that he might attend to the race, and
report the truth.

   [Footnote 750: Cf. Æn. v. 129; Quintus Calab. iv. 193: Τοῖσι δὲ
   σημαίνεσκε δρόμου τέλος ὠκυτάτοιο Ἀτρείδης.]

Then they all at once raised their lashes over their steeds, and struck
them with the reins, and cheered them on with words incessantly; but
they rapidly flew over the plain, far away from the ships, swiftly, and
beneath their breasts the excited dust stood up, raised like a cloud or
a whirlwind; whilst their manes were tossed about by the breath of the
wind. Sometimes, indeed, the chariots approached the fruitful earth,
and at others bounded aloft; but the drivers stood erect in their
chariots, and the heart of each of them, eager for victory, palpitated:
and each animated his own steeds, but they flew along, stirring up dust
from the plain. But when now the fleet steeds were performing the last
course, back towards the hoary deep, then appeared the excellence of
each, and the course was immediately extended to the horses;[751] and
then the swift-footed steeds of the son of Pheres[752] swiftly bore him
away. The male Trojan steeds of Diomede, however, bore [themselves] next
to them; nor were they at all far distant, but very near; for they
always seemed as if about to mount into the chariot. And with their
breathing the back and broad shoulders of Eumelus were warmed; for they
flew along, leaning their heads over him. And certainly he had either
passed, or made [the victory] doubtful, had not Phœbus Apollo been
enraged with the son of Tydeus, and accordingly shaken out of his hands
the shining lash. Then from the eyes of him indignant tears poured,
because indeed he beheld the others now going much swifter, whilst his
[steeds] were injured, running without a goad. Neither did Apollo,
fraudulently injuring Tydides, escape the notice of Minerva, but she
very quickly overtook the shepherd of the people, and gave him his lash,
and put vigour into his steeds. And to the son of Admetus, the goddess,
indignant, advanced, and broke for him his horse-yoke; and so his mares
ran on both sides out of the way, and the pole was dashed upon the
ground. He himself was thrown from the driving-seat close by the wheel,
and was lacerated all round in his arms, his mouth, and nostrils, and
his forehead was bruised near the eyebrows; but his eyes were filled
with tears, and his liquid voice was clogged. Then Diomede passing by,
directed his hollow-hoofed steeds, bounding far before the others; for
Minerva had put vigour into his steeds, and given him glory. But after
him, however, the son of Atreus, yellow-haired Menelaus, drove; but
Antilochus cheered on the steeds of his father:

   [Footnote 751: _I.e._ "the speed of the horses was immediately
   put to the stretch," as the Oxford Translator well, but freely,
   renders it.]

   [Footnote 752: Eumelus.]

"Push on! and exert yourselves, both of you, as fast as possible. I
indeed do not order you to contend with the steeds of warlike Diomede,
to which Minerva has now given speed, and given glory to him; but
quickly overtake the horses of Atrides, nor be left behind, lest Æthe,
being a mare, shed disgrace upon you both. Why should ye be left
inferior, O best [of steeds]? For thus I tell you, and it shall surely
be accomplished; attention will not be paid to you by Nestor, the
shepherd of the people, but he will immediately slay you with the sharp
brass, if we, remiss, bear off the less worthy prize. But follow, and
hasten as fast as possible. These things will I myself manage and look
to, to pass him by in the narrow way; nor shall it escape me."

Thus he spoke; but they, dreading the threat of their master, ran faster
for a short time: but immediately then warlike Antilochus perceived the
narrow of the hollow way. It was a fissure of the earth, where the
wintry torrent collected, had broken away [part] of the road, and
gullied the whole place; thither drove Menelaus, avoiding the clash of
wheels. But Antilochus, deviating, guided his solid-hoofed horses out of
the way, and turning aside, pursued him a little. But the son of Atreus
feared, and shouted to Antilochus:

"Antilochus, rashly art thou driving thy horses; but check thy steeds
for the road is narrow, and thou wilt soon drive past in a wider lest
thou damage both [of us], running foul of [my] chariot." Thus he spoke;
but Antilochus drove even much faster, urging [them] on with the lash,
like unto one not hearing. As far as is the cast of a quoit, hurled from
the shoulder, which a vigorous youth has thrown, making experiments of
his youthful strength; so far they ran abreast; but those of Atrides
fell back: for he himself voluntarily ceased to drive, lest the
solid-hoofed steeds should clash in the road, and overturn the
well-joined chariots, and they themselves should fall in the dust, while
contending for the victory. And him yellow-haired Menelaus, chiding,
addressed:

"O Antilochus, no other mortal is more pernicious than thou. Avaunt! for
we Greeks untruly said that thou wast prudent. Yet not even thus shalt
thou bear away the prize without an oath." [753] Thus saying, he cheered
on his steeds, and spoke to them:

"Be not kept back, nor stand, grieving in your hearts: sooner will the
feet and knees grow weary to them than to you; for they are both
deprived of vigour."

Thus he spoke; but they, dreading the exhortation of their master, ran
more fleetly, and became very near the others. But the Greeks sitting in
assembly,[754] beheld the steeds, and they flew along, raising dust over
the plain. Then first Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, distinguished
the horses; for he sat outside the circus, very high up, on an
observatory; and hearing him, being far off, encouraging [his steeds],
knew him. He also perceived a remarkable steed outstripping, which in
every other part indeed was chesnut, but in its forehead was a white
round spot, like the moon. And he stood erect, and delivered this speech
amongst the Greeks:

   [Footnote 753: "Videtur proverbii loco dictum in eos, qui non
   facile, non sine gravi labore ac difficultate consequi possent,
   quod peterent, sive qui rem valde difficilem
   peterent."--Ernesti.]

   [Footnote 754: See note on vii. p. 129, n. 2.]

"O friends, leaders and chieftains of the Greeks, do I alone recognize
the horses, or do ye also? Different steeds indeed appear to me to be
foremost, and there seems a different charioteer; but those [mares]
which hitherto were successful, are probably hurt upon the plain
somewhere: for surely I first saw them turning round the goal, but now I
can no longer see them, although my eyes survey the Trojan plain as I
gaze around. Surely the reins have fled the charioteer, and he could not
rein well round the goal, and did not succeed in turning. There I
imagine he fell out, and at the same time broke his chariot, whilst they
(the mares) bolted, when fury seized their mind. But do ye also,
standing up, look, for I cannot well distinguish; it appears to me to be
an Ætolian hero by birth, and [who] rules amongst the Argives, the son
of horse-breaking Tydeus, gallant Diomede."

But him swift Ajax, the son of Oïleus, bitterly reproached:

"Idomeneus, why dost thou prate endlessly?[755] Those high-prancing
mares run over the vast plain afar. Neither art thou so much the
youngest amongst the Greeks, nor do thine eyes see most sharply from thy
head: but thou art always prating with words. Nor is it at all necessary
for thee to be a prater, for others better than thou are present. For
the mares of Eumelus are still[756] foremost, which were so before, and
he himself is advancing, holding the reins."

But him the leader of the Cretans, indignant, answered in turn:

"Ajax, best at abuse, reviler, but in all other things thou art inferior
to the Greeks, because thy temper is morose; come now, let us stake a
tripod[757] or a goblet, and let us both appoint Agamemnon, the son of
Atreus, arbiter, which horses are foremost; that paying, thou mayest
learn."

   [Footnote 755: "Πάρος implies habit, as in i. 553, particularly
   in connection with a verb of such import, as in xviii.
   425."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 756: This is implied in περ.]

   [Footnote 757: "Ut supra, xxii. 254, erat ἐπιδόσθαι, pro δόσθαι
   μάρτυρας ἐπί τινι χρήματι, sic nunc τρίποδος περιδώμεθα est
   δώμεθα ὅρκον περὶ τρίποδος, quem pœnæ loco daturus erit uter
   nostrum temere contenderit."--Heyne.]

Thus he spoke; but swift Ajax, son of Oïleus, immediately rose to reply
in harsh words. And now doubtless the strife would have proceeded
farther to both, had not Achilles himself risen up, and spoke:

"No longer now, O Ajax and Idomeneus, hold altercation in evil, angry
words, for it is not fitting, and ye also would blame another, whoever
should do such things; but, sitting down in the circus, look towards the
steeds, which themselves will soon arrive, contending for victory; and
then will ye know, each of you, the horses of the Greeks, which are
second, and which first."

Thus he spoke; but the son of Tydeus came very near, pursuing, and
always drove on [his horses] with the lash across the shoulders; whilst
the steeds were raised up aloft into the air, quickly completing their
course, and the drops of dust kept always bespattering their charioteer.
The chariot, adorned with gold and tin, rolled on close to the
swift-footed steeds; nor was there a deep trace of the tires behind in
the fine dust, but they, hastening, flew. But he stood in the midst of
the circus, and much perspiration exuded from the steeds, from their
necks and chest to the ground. But he himself leaped to the ground from
his all-shining chariot, and rested his scourge against the yoke; nor
was gallant Sthenelus dilatory, but he eagerly seized the prize, and
gave the woman to his magnanimous companions to escort, and the handled
tripod to bear away; whilst he himself unyoked the steeds.

Next to him Nelcian Antilochus drove his steeds, outstripping Menelaus
by stratagem, not indeed by speed. Yet even thus Menelaus drove his
swift horses near; but as far as a horse is distant from the wheel,
which, exerting its speed with the chariot, draws its master through the
plain, and the extreme hairs of its tail touch the wheel-tire, but it
rolls very near, nor is there much space between, while it runs over the
vast plain; so far was illustrious Menelaus left behind by Antilochus:
although at first he was left behind as much as the cast of a quoit, yet
he quickly overtook him; for the doughty strength of Agamemnon's mare,
the beautiful-maned Æthe, was increased. And if the course had been
still longer to both, he would surely have passed him by, nor left it
doubtful. Meriones again, the good attendant of Idomeneus, was left
behind a spear's throw by the illustrious Menelaus, for his fair-maned
steeds were the slowest, and he himself least skilful in driving a
chariot in the contest. But the son of Admetus came last of others,
dragging his beauteous chariot, driving his steeds before him. But him
swift-footed, noble Achilles seeing, pitied, and standing amongst the
Greeks, spoke [to him] winged words:

"The best man drives his solid-hoofed steeds the last. But come, let us
give him, as is right, the second prize; and let the son of Tydeus bear
away the first."

Thus he spoke; and all approved as he ordered. And now truly he had
given the mare to him (for the Greeks approved it), had not Antilochus,
the son of magnanimous Nestor, rising up, replied to Achilles, the son
of Peleus, on the question of justice:[758]

   [Footnote 758: Not "with justice," as the translators, following
   the Scholiast, have interpreted δίκη. That would have required
   σὺν δίκη, as in Soph. Antig. 23.]

"O Achilles, I shall be very indignant with thee, if thou fulfillest
this promise; for thou art about to deprive me of my reward, considering
these things, that his chariot and fleet steeds were injured, he himself
being skilful; but he should have prayed to the immortals, then would he
by no means have come up driving the last. But if thou pitiest him, and
it be agreeable to thy mind, thou hast much gold and brass in thy tent,
and cattle and maidens, and solid-hoofed steeds are thine. Taking from
these, give him afterwards even a greater reward, or even now forthwith,
that the Greeks may applaud thee. This, however, I will not resign, but
let him of the warriors strive for her, whoever wishes to contend with
me in strength of hands."

Thus he spoke; and swift-footed, noble Achilles smiled, favouring
Antilochus, for he was a dear companion to him; and, answering,
addressed to him winged words:

"O Antilochus, since thou now biddest me give something else to Eumelus
from my house, this will I indeed accomplish. I will give him the
corslet which I took from Asteropæus, brazen, around which there is
entwined a rim of shining tin; and it is of great value."

He spoke; and ordered his dear comrade, Automedon, to bear it from the
tent: and he went and brought it to him; then he placed it in the hands
of Eumelus, and he received it rejoicing. But Menelaus also arose
amongst them, grieving in his mind, vehemently enraged with Antilochus.
Then a herald placed the sceptre in his hands, and ordered the Greeks to
be silent; and then the godlike hero spoke:

"O Antilochus, hitherto prudent, what hast thou done? Thou hast
disgraced my skill, and injured my steeds, driving thine before them,
which indeed are greatly inferior. But come, ye leaders and chiefs of
the Greeks, judge between us both, and not for favour; lest some one of
the brazen-mailed Greeks should say: 'Menelaus having overcome
Antilochus by falsehoods, came off, leading the mare [as a prize], for
his steeds were very inferior, but he himself superior in skill and
strength.'[759] But come, I myself will decide, and I think that no
other of the Greeks will blame me, for it will be just."

"O Antilochus, nurtured of Jove, come hither, I pray, as it is just,
standing before thy horses and chariot, and holding in thy hands the
pliant lash with which thou didst formerly drive, touching thy steeds,
swear by earth-encompassing Neptune, that thou didst not willingly
impede my chariot by stratagem." [760]

   [Footnote 759: Cf. vers. 571, sq]

   [Footnote 760: See ver. 441.]

But him prudent Antilochus in turn answered:

"Have patience now, since I am much younger than thou, O king Menelaus,
and thou art older and superior. Thou knowest of what sort are the
errors of a youth; for his mind is indeed more volatile, and his counsel
weak. Therefore let thy heart endure, and I myself will give thee the
steed which I have received. And if indeed thou demandest anything else
greater from my house, I should be willing to give it immediately rather
than fall for ever, O Jove-nurtured, from thy good opinion, and be
sinful towards the gods."

He spoke; and the son of magnanimous Nestor, leading the mare, placed it
in the hands of Menelaus; but his[761] mind was cheered[762] as the dew
[is diffused] over the ears of growing corn, when the fields are
bristling. Thus indeed, O Menelaus, was thy soul in thy breast cheered;
and speaking, he addressed to him winged words:

   [Footnote 761: _I.e._ Menelaus.]

   [Footnote 762: Or softened, melted. See Heyne.]

"Antilochus, now indeed will I cease being enraged with thee, for
formerly thou wert neither foolish nor volatile; though now youth has
subdued reason. Avoid a second time overreaching thy superiors; for not
another man of the Greeks would have easily appeased me. But thou hast
already suffered much, and accomplished many deeds, as well as thy good
father and brother, for my sake: therefore will I be persuaded by thee,
supplicating, and will give the mare also, although being mine; that
these too may perceive that my soul is never overbearing or
unrelenting."

He spoke, and gave the steed to Noëmon, the comrade of Antilochus, to
lead away; and then he received the shining goblet [himself]. But
Meriones, the fourth, took up the two talents of gold, in which order he
drove; but the fifth prize was left,[763] which Achilles, bearing
through the assembly of the Greeks, gave to Nestor, and standing by him,
said:

"Receive now, and let this be a keepsake to thee, a memorial of the
burial of Patroclus; for never more shalt thou behold him among the
Greeks. I give this prize to thee even thus;[764] for thou indeed wilt
not fight with the cæstus, nor wrestle, nor engage in the contest of
hurling the javelin, nor run on the feet, for grievous old age now
oppresses thee."

   [Footnote 763: Because Eumelus had received an extraordinary
   prize.]

   [Footnote 764: _I.e._ although thou hast not shared the contests.
   See Kennedy.]

Thus speaking, he placed it in his hands; but he rejoicing, accepted it,
and addressing him, spoke in winged words:

"Assuredly, O my son, thou hast spoken all these things aright; for no
longer are my limbs firm, my friend, nor my feet, nor yet do my hands
move pliant on each side from my shoulders. Would that I were as young,
and my strength was firm to me, as when the Epeans buried king
Amarynceus at Byprasium, and his sons staked the prizes of the king.
There no man was equal to me, neither of the Epeans, nor of the Pelians
themselves, nor of the magnanimous Ætolians. In the cæstus I conquered
Clytomedes, the son of Enops; and in wrestling, Ancæus, the Pleuronian,
who rose up against me; and on foot I outstripped Iphiclus, though being
excellent; and with the spear hurled beyond Phyleus and Polydorus. The
two sons of Actor drove by me by their steeds only, exceeding me in
number, envying me the victory, for the greatest rewards were left for
that contest. But they were two; the one indeed steadily directed the
reins, whilst the other urged on with the lash. Thus I formerly was, but
now let younger men undertake such deeds, as it becomes me to obey sad
old age, though I then excelled amongst heroes. But go, and celebrate
thy comrade's obsequies with games. This, indeed, I willingly accept,
and my soul rejoices that thou art ever mindful of me; nor am I
forgotten by thee, with what honour it becomes me to be honoured among
the Greeks. And for these things may the gods give thee a proper
return."

Thus he spoke; but the son of Peleus went through the great assemblage
of the Greeks, when he had heard all the praise of Nestor. Then he
proposed prizes for a laborious boxing-match.[765] Leading a mule,
patient of toil, six years old, unbroken, which is most difficult to be
tamed, he tied it in the circus; and for the conquered again he staked a
two-handled cup: then he stood up, and spoke amongst the Greeks:

   [Footnote 765: Cf. Virg. Æn. v. 365.]

"O ye sons of Atreus, and other well-greaved Greeks, we invite two men,
who are very expert, raising their hands aloft, to strike for these with
the fist. But to whom Apollo indeed may give victory, and all the Greeks
approve, leading away the mule, patient of labour, let him conduct it to
his tent; but the vanquished shall bear away a double cup."

Thus he spoke; and immediately arose a man brave and great, skilled in
the art of boxing, Epëus, son of Panopeus; and grasping the
patient-toiling mule, said:

"Let him draw near, whosoever will bear away the double cup; but I
think that no other of the Greeks having conquered in boxing, will lead
away the mule; for I boast myself to be the best man. Is it not enough
that I am inferior in battle?[766] For it is by no means possible for a
man to be skilled in every work. For thus I tell you, and it shall be
accomplished, I will utterly fracture his body, and also break his
bones. And let his friends remain here assembled, who may carry him away
vanquished by my hands."

   [Footnote 766: "_I.e._ is it not enough, that, though I am
   inferior in battle, I am superior in boxing?"--Oxford Transl.]

Thus he spoke; but they were all mute, in silence. But Euryalus alone
stood up against him, a godlike hero, son of king Mecisteus, a
descendant of Talaïon, who formerly came to Thebes to the funeral of the
deceased Œdipus, and there vanquished all the Cadmeans. About him the
spear-renowned son of Tydeus was busied, encouraging him with words, for
he greatly wished victory to him. And first he threw around him his
girdle, and then gave him the well-cut thongs [made of the hide] of a
rustic ox. But they twain, having girded themselves, proceeded into the
middle of the circus, and both at the same time engaged, with their
strong hands opposite, raising [them up], and their heavy hands were
mingled. Then a horrid crashing of jaws ensued, and the sweat flowed on
all sides from their limbs. Then noble Epëus rushed in, and smote him
upon the cheek, while looking round, nor could he stand any longer; but
his fair limbs tottered under him. And as when, from beneath the
surface, rippled[767] by the north wind, a fish leaps out upon the weedy
shore, and the dark billow covers it, so he, stricken, sprang up. But
magnanimous Epëus, taking [him] in his hands, lifted him up; and his
dear comrades stood around, who conducted him through the circus on
tottering feet, spitting out clotted gore, [and] drooping his head on
each side; and then, leading, placed him among them, insensible, while
they, departing, received the double cup.

But the son of Peleus quickly staked other third prizes for laborious
wrestling, exhibiting [them] to the Greeks; for the conqueror, indeed, a
large tripod, ready for the fire,[768] which the Greeks estimated
amongst themselves at twelve oxen; and for the conquered person he
placed a female in the midst. She understood various works, and they
reckoned her at four oxen. But he stood up, and spoke this speech among
the Greeks:

"Arise, ye who will make trial of this contest." Thus he spoke; but then
arose mighty Telamonian Ajax, and wise Ulysses stood up, skilled in
stratagems. But these two, having girded themselves, advanced into the
midst of the circus, and grasped each other's arms with their strong
hands, like the rafters[769] of a lofty dome, which a renowned architect
has fitted, guarding off the violence of the winds. Then their backs
creaked, forcibly dragged by their powerful hands, and the copious[770]
sweat poured down; and thick welds, purple with blood, arose upon their
sides and shoulders. Yet always eagerly they sought desired victory, for
the sake of the well-made tripod. Neither could Ulysses trip, nor throw
him to the ground, nor could Ajax him, for the valiant might of Ulysses
hindered him. But when at length they were wearying the well-greaved
Greeks, then mighty Telamonian Ajax addressed him:

   [Footnote 767: See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 768: _I.e._ intended for domestic purposes, not a mere
   votive offering or ornament.]

   [Footnote 769: 'Αμείβοντες δόκοι μεγάλαι, άλλήλαις προσπίπτουσαι,
   ὥστε βαστάζειν τήν ὀροφήν· αἵτινες καὶ συστάται
   καλοῦνται.--Schol.]

   [Footnote 770: See Kennedy.]

"O most noble son of Laërtes, Ulysses of many wiles, either lift up me,
or I thee, and all these things will be a care to Jove."

So saying, he lifted him up: but yet was not Ulysses unmindful of a
stratagem. Aiming at his ham, he struck him behind, and relaxed his
limbs, and threw him on his back; but Ulysses fell upon his breast; then
the people admiring gazed, and were stupified. Next noble, much-enduring
Ulysses, lifted him in turn, and moved him a little from the ground, nor
did he lift him up completely; but he bent his knee; and both fell upon
the ground near to each other, and were defiled with dust. And, getting
up, they had surely wrestled for the third time, had not Achilles
himself stood up and restrained them:

"No longer contend, nor exhaust yourselves with evils; for there is
victory to both: so depart, receiving equal rewards, in order that the
other Greeks also may contend." Thus he spoke; but they indeed heard him
willingly, and obeyed; and, wiping off the dust, put on their tunics.
But the son of Peleus immediately staked other rewards of swiftness, a
wrought silver cup, which contained, indeed, six measures, but in beauty
much excelled [all] upon the whole earth, for the ingenious Sidonians
had wrought it cunningly, and Phœnician men had carried it over the
shadowy sea, and exposed it for sale in the harbours, and presented it
as a gift to Thoas. Euneus, son of Jason, however, had given it to the
hero Patroclus, as a ransom for Lycaon, son of Priam. This also Achilles
offered as a new prize, to be contended for, in honour of his companion,
whoever should be the nimblest on swift feet; for the second, again, he
proposed an ox, large and luxuriant in fat; and for the last he staked
half a talent of gold. But he stood upright, and spoke amongst the
Greeks:

"Arise, ye who will make trial of this contest also." Thus he spoke; and
immediately swift Ajax, son of Oïleus, arose, and much-enduring Ulysses;
and after them Antilochus, son of Nestor; for he, indeed, excelled all
the youths in fleetness. But they stood in order, and Achilles pointed
out the goal; and their course was stretched out from the goal.[771]
Then swiftly leaped forth the son of Oïleus; but very close after him
rushed noble Ulysses; as when a shuttle is at the breast of a
well-girdled dame, which she throws very skilfully with her hands,
drawing out the woof, [and inserting them] into the warp, and holds it
near her breast: so ran Ulysses near him; and with his feet trod on his
footsteps behind, before the dust was shed over them. But noble Ulysses,
constantly running swiftly, exhaled his breath upon his head; and all
the Greeks shouted to him, eager for victory, and encouraged him,
hastening rapidly. But when they were now completing their last course,
Ulysses forthwith prayed in his mind to azure-eyed Minerva:

   [Footnote 771: See Kennedy, and on the race of the δίαυλος,
   Smith's Dict. of Antiquities.]

"Hear, O goddess, come a propitious assistant to my feet." Thus he
spoke, praying; but Pallas Minerva heard him; and she made his limbs
nimble, his feet and his hands above. But when they were just about to
fly in upon the prize, then Ajax slipped, while running (for Minerva did
the mischief), where the dung of the deep-lowing slaughtered oxen was
around, which swift-footed Achilles had slain in honour of Fatroclus.
Then much-enduring, noble Ulysses took up the goblet, as he came running
the first; and illustrious Ajax received the ox. But he stood, holding
the horn of the rustic ox in his hands; and, spitting out the dung,
spoke amongst the Greeks:

"Alas! surely a goddess injured my feet, who ever of old stands by
Ulysses as a mother, and assists him."

Thus he spoke; and they all then laughed heartily at him. But Antilochus
next bore away the last prize, smiling, and spoke among the Greeks:

"I will tell you all, my friends, though now knowing it, that even still
the immortals honour the aged. For Ajax, indeed, is a little older than
I am: but he is of a former generation, and former men; and they say
that he is of crude old age, and it is difficult for the Greeks to
contend in swiftness with him, except for Achilles."

Thus he spoke; and praised the swift-footed son of Peleus. But Achilles,
answering, addressed him with words:

"Thy praise, O Antilochus, shall not be spoken in vain, but for thee I
will add half a talent of gold."

So saying, he placed it in his hands; and he, rejoicing, received it.
But the son of Peleus, bearing into the circus, laid down a long spear,
and a shield, and helmet, the arms of Sarpedon, which Patroclus had
stripped him of; and stood upright, and spoke amongst the Greeks:

"We invite two warriors, whoever are bravest, having put; on these arms,
[and] seizing the flesh-rending brass, to make trial of each other
before the host for these. Whoever shall be the first to wound the fair
flesh, and touch the entrails through the armour and black blood, to
him, indeed, will I give this silver-studded, beautiful Thracian sword,
which I formerly took from Asteropæus. But let both bear away these arms
in common, and before them I will place a splendid banquet in my tents."

Thus he spoke; but then arose mighty Telamonian Ajax, and the son of
Tydeus, valiant Diomede rose up. But they, after they had armed apart on
either side from the ground, both came together into the midst, eager to
fight, looking dreadfully; and stupor possessed all the Greeks. But when
approaching each other, they were near, thrice indeed they rushed on,
and thrice made the attack hand to hand. Then Ajax, indeed, pierced
through his shield, equal on all sides, nor reached the flesh; for the
corslet inside protected him. But next the son of Tydeus, with the point
of his shining spear, endeavoured to reach the neck, over his great
shield. And then, indeed, the Greeks, fearing for Ajax, desired them,
ceasing, to take up equal rewards. The hero, however, gave the great
sword to Diomede, bearing it both with the sheath and the well-cut belt.

Then the son of Peleus deposited a rudely-molten mass of iron, which
the great might of Eëtion used formerly to hurl. But when swift-footed,
noble Achilles slew him, he brought this also, with other possessions,
in his ships. Then he stood up, and spoke amongst the Greeks:

"Arise, you who will make trial of this contest also. Even if his rich
fields be of very far and wide extent, using this he will have it even
for five revolving years; for indeed neither will his shepherd nor his
ploughman go into the city wanting iron, but [this] will furnish it."

Thus he spoke; then up arose warlike Polypœtes, and the valiant might of
godlike Leonteus arose; also Telamonian Ajax, and noble Epëus arose.
Then they stood in order; but noble Epëus seized the mass, and, whirling
it round, threw it; but all the Greeks laughed at him. Next Leonteus, a
branch of Mars, threw second; but third, mighty Telamonian Ajax hurled
with his strong hand, and cast beyond the marks of all. But when now
warlike Polypœtes had seized the mass, as far as a cow-herdsman throws
his crook, which, whirled around, flies through the herds of oxen, so
far, through the whole stadium, did he cast beyond; but they shouted
aloud; and the companions of brave Polypœtes, rising up, bore away the
prize of the king to the hollow ships.

Next, for the archers, he staked iron fit for making arrows,[772] and
laid down ten battle-axes, and also ten demi-axes. He also set upright
the mast of an azure-prowed vessel, afar upon the sands; from [this] he
fastened a timid dove by a slender cord, by the foot, at which he
ordered [them] to shoot:

   [Footnote 772: _I.e._ well-tempered.]

"Whosoever indeed shall strike the timid dove, taking up all the
battle-axes, may bear [them] to his tent; but whosoever shall hit the
cord, missing the bird (for he is inferior), let him bear off the
demi-axes."

Thus he spoke; but then up rose the might of king Teucer, and up rose
Meriones, the active attendant of Idomeneus; and taking the lots, they
shook them in a brazen helmet. But Teucer was appointed first by lot;
and straightway he shot an arrow strenuously, nor did he vow to
sacrifice a celebrated hecatomb of firstling lambs to king [Apollo]. He
missed the bird indeed, because Apollo envied him this, but he hit the
string with which the bird was fastened, close to its foot; and the
bitter arrow cut the cord quite through. Then indeed the bird ascended
towards heaven, but the cord was sent down towards the earth: and the
Greeks shouted applause. But Meriones, hastening, snatched the bow from
his hand; and now held the arrow for a long time, as he had directed it;
and immediately vowed to sacrifice to far-darting Apollo a noble
hecatomb of firstling lambs. But he saw the timid dove on high beneath
the clouds, which, as she was turning round, he hit in the middle under
the wing, and the arrow pierced quite through. And it indeed again was
fixed in the ground at the foot of Meriones: but the bird, alighting
upon the mast of the azure-beaked galley, drooped its neck, and its
close wings were at the same time expanded. And swift its soul flitted
from its members, and it fell far from [the mast]; but the people
wondering, beheld, and were stupified. Then Meriones took up all the ten
battle-axes, and Teucer carried off the demi-axes to the hollow barks.

Then the son of Peleus indeed, bearing it into the circus, staked a long
spear, and also a caldron, untouched by fire, worth an ox, adorned with
flowers; and immediately the spearmen arose. The son of Atreus rose up,
wide-ruling Agamemnon, and Meriones, the expert attendant of Idomeneus;
whom also swift-footed, noble Achilles addressed:

"O son of Atreus, for we know how much thou dost surpass all, as well as
how much thou excellest in strength and in the javelin, wherefore thou
indeed mayest repair to the hollow barks, possessing this reward; but
let us give the spear to the hero Meriones, if, truly, thou dost thus
wish it in thy mind; for I on my part advise it."

Thus he spoke; nor did the king of men, Agamemnon, disobey; but he gave
the brazen spear to Meriones; and the hero himself gave the very
splendid prize to the herald Talthybius.




                        BOOK THE TWENTY-FOURTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Jove orders Thetis to go to Achilles, and demand the restoration of
Hector's body. Mercury is also sent to Priam, whom he guides in safety
through the Grecian camp, to the tent of Achilles. A pathetic interview
follows, and Priam ransoms the body of his son, and obtains a twelve
days' truce, during which he performs his funeral obsequies.


The assembly was dissolved, and the people were dispersed, to go each to
their hollow barks. They indeed took care to indulge in the banquet and
sweet slumber; but Achilles wept, remembering his dear companion, nor
did all-subduing sleep possess him, but he was rolled here and there,
longing for the vigour and valiant might of Patroclus. And whatever
things he had accomplished with him, and hardships he had suffered, both
[encountering] the battles of heroes, and measuring the grievous waves,
remembering these things, he shed the warm tear, lying at one time upon
his sides,[773] at others again on his back, and at other times on his
face; but again starting up, he wandered about in sadness along the
shore of the sea; nor did Morn, appearing over the sea and the shores,
escape his notice. But he, when he had harnessed his fleet steeds to his
chariot, bound Hector to be dragged after his chariot; and having drawn
him thrice around the tomb of the dead son of Menœtius, again rested in
his tent; and left him there, having stretched him on his face in the
dust. But Apollo kept off all pollution from his body, pitying the hero,
although dead; and encircled him with the golden ægis, lest that,
dragging, he might lacerate him.

   [Footnote 773: Cf. Heliodor. Ethiop. vii. p. 325: Παννύχιος γοῦν
   ἔκειτο, πυκνὰ μὲν πρὸς έκατέραν πλευρὰν τὸ σῶμα διαστρέφουσα.
   Chariton quotes the line of Homer, when describing the uneasy
   rest of a love-stricken being.]

Thus he indeed, raging, was insulting noble Hector, but the blessed
gods, looking towards him, commiserated, and incited the watchful slayer
of Argus to steal him away. Now, to all the rest it was certainly
pleasing, but by no means so to Juno, to Neptune, nor to the azure-eyed
maid; but they were obstinate,[774] for sacred Ilium was odious to them
from the first, and Priam and his people, on account of the infatuation
of Paris, who had insulted the goddesses, when they came to his cottage,
and preferred her who gratified his destructive lust.[775] But when the
twelfth morning from that had arisen, then indeed Phœbus Apollo spoke
amongst the immortals:

   [Footnote 774: After ἔχον supply τὴν διάθεσιν (with
   Schol.)="_kept their determination_."]

   [Footnote 775: Payne Knight would reject vers. 23--30,
   considering the word μαχλοσύνην as un-Homeric. If they are
   genuine, they furnish the earliest mention of the judgment of
   Paris. Cf. Mollus on Longus, Past. iii. 27; Intpp. on Hygin. Fab.
   xcii.]

"Cruel ye are, O gods, [and] injurious. Has not Hector indeed formerly
burned for you the thighs of bulls and chosen goats? whom now, although
being dead, ye will not venture to take away for his wife, and mother,
his son, and his father Priam, and the people to behold; who would
quickly burn him with fire, and perform his funeral rites. But ye wish
to bestow favour, O gods, upon destructive Achilles, to whom there is
neither just disposition, nor flexible feelings in his breast; who is
skilled in savage deeds, as a lion, which, yielding to the impulse of
his mighty strength and haughty soul, attacks the flocks of men, that he
may take a repast. Thus has Achilles lost all compassion, nor in him is
there sense of shame, which greatly hurts and profits men. For perhaps
some one will lose another more dear, either a brother, or a son; yet
does he cease weeping and lamenting, for the Destinies have placed in
men an enduring mind. But this man drags godlike Hector around the tomb
of his dear companion, binding him to his chariot, after he has taken
away his dear life; yet truly this is neither more honourable, nor
better for him. [Let him beware] lest we be indignant with him, brave as
he is, because, raging, he insults even the senseless clay."

But him the white-armed Juno, indignant, addressed: "This truly might be
our language, O God of the silver bow, if now thou assignest equal
honour to Achilles and to Hector. Hector indeed is a mortal, and sucked
a woman's breast; but Achilles is the offspring of a goddess, whom I
myself both nurtured and educated, and gave as a wife to the hero
Peleus, who is dear to the immortals in their heart: and ye were all
present at the nuptials,[776] O gods; and thou didst feast amongst them,
holding thy lyre, O companion of the evil, ever faithless."

But her cloud-compelling Jove, answering, addressed:

"O Juno, be not now completely enraged with the gods; for their honour
shall not be at all equal: but Hector also was the dearest of mortals to
the gods, of [those] who are in Ilium; for thus was he to me; for never
did he miss [offering] pleasing gifts. For never did my altar lack the
fitting banquet, or incense, or odour: for this honour are we allotted.
Yet let us forego to steal away bold Hector; (nor is it at all
practicable without the knowledge of Achilles;) for he is ever by him
both by night and day, like as a mother. But let some of the gods call
Thetis near me, that to her I may tell prudent advice, in order that
Achilles may receive gifts from Priam, and ransom Hector."

Thus he spoke; but Iris, swift as the whirlwind, rose up, about to bear
his message. Half way between Samos and rugged Imbrus she plunged into
the dark sea, and the ocean groaned. She sank to the bottom like unto a
leaden ball,[777] which, [placed] along the horn of a wild bull,
entering, descends, bearing death to the raw-devouring fishes. But she
found Thetis in her hollow cave, and the other sea goddesses sat around
her, assembled together; she indeed, in the midst, lamented the fate of
her own blameless son, who was about to perish in fertile Troy, far away
from his native land. But her swift-footed Iris, standing near,
addressed:

   [Footnote 776: See Grote, vol. i. p. 257.]

   [Footnote 777: The only clear explanation of this passage seems
   to be that of the traveller Clarke, quoted by Kennedy, as
   follows: "The Greeks in fishing let their line, with the lead at
   the end, run over a piece of horn fixed at the side of the boat,"
   to prevent, as Kennedy remarks, the wear from friction. Pollux,
   x. 30, 31, merely mentions the μολυβδαίνη among the implements of
   fishermen; but says nothing of the manner in which it was used.]

"Rise, O Thetis; Jove, skilled in imperishable counsels, calls thee."

Her then the silver-footed goddess Thetis answered:

"Why does that mighty god call me? I am ashamed to mix with the
immortals, for I have innumerable griefs in my soul. Yet must I go; for
the word which he utters will not be in vain."

Thus having spoken, the divine one of goddesses took her dark robe, than
which no garment is blacker. And she set out to go, whilst wind-footed,
fleet Iris led the way; and the water of the sea retired on each side of
them.[778] Next ascending the shore, they were impelled up to heaven.
They found the far-sounding son of Saturn; and all the other blessed
immortal gods sat assembled around him; but she then sat down beside
father Jove, and Minerva gave place to her. Then Juno placed a beautiful
golden goblet in her hand, and consoled her with words; and Thetis
having drunk, returned it. But to them the father of men and gods began
discourse:

"Thou hast come to Olympus, although sad, O goddess Thetis, having in
thy mind a grief not to be forgotten; and I know it. Yet even thus will
I speak, and on this account have I called thee hither. Nine days has a
contest already been excited amongst the immortals respecting the body
of Hector, and Achilles the destroyer of cities, and they have urged the
watchful slayer of Argus to steal him. But I bestow this glory[779] on
Achilles, securing for the future thy respect and love. Descend very
speedily to the camp, and give orders to thy son. Tell him that the gods
are offended, and that I am angry above all the immortals, because with
infuriated mind he detains Hector at the crooked barks, nor has released
him: if perchance he will revere me, and restore Hector. Meanwhile I
will despatch Iris to magnanimous Priam, that, going to the ships of the
Greeks, he may ransom his beloved son, and carry offerings to Achilles,
which may melt his soul."

   [Footnote 778: "At Il. ψ. 231: Πηλείδης δ' άπὸ πυρκαΐης ἑτέρωσε
   λιασθείς, _going away, or aside from the pyre_. And so νόσφι
   λιασθείς, II. α. 349, λ. 80. One of the plainest instances of the
   same sense is at Il. ω. 96, of the waves, which _make way_ for
   the goddesses as they rise from the depths of the sea, which
   _turn aside_, and yield them a passage."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 404.]

   [Footnote 779: "The sense is: _I have not sanctioned the proposal
   that the body of Hector should be removed furtively, in order
   that an opportunity might be offered to Achilles of receiving a
   ransom for it, which would redound to his glory_."--Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke; nor did the silver-footed goddess Thetis disobey; but,
rushing impetuously, she descended down from the tops of Olympus. Then
she came to the tent of her son, and found him within, moaning
continually, whilst around him his dear comrades were busily occupied,
and prepared a feast, for a great thick-fleeced sheep had been
slaughtered by them in the tent. But his venerable mother sat down very
near him, and caressed him with her hand, and spoke, and addressed him:

"O my son, how long, grieving and bewailing, wilt thou afflict thine
heart, being not at all mindful of either food or bed? But it is good to
be mingled in love with a woman; for thou shalt not live long for me,
but Death and stern Fate already stand near thee. But quickly attend to
me, for I am a messenger to thee from Jove. He says that the gods are
angry with thee, and that he himself above all the immortals is enraged,
because with furious mind thou detainest Hector at the hollow ships, nor
dost release him. But come, release him, and receive ransoms for the
dead body."

But her swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed:

"Let him approach hither, who may bear the ransoms, and bear away the
body, if indeed the Olympian himself now commands it with a serious
mind." Thus they indeed, the mother and the son, amongst the assemblage
of the ships, spoke many winged words to each other; but the son of
Saturn impelled Iris towards sacred Ilium:

"Go quickly, fleet Iris, having left the seat of Olympus, order
magnanimous Priam to ransom his dear son to Ilium, going to the ships of
the Greeks; and to carry gifts to Achilles, which may appease his mind,
alone; nor let another man of the Trojans go with him. Let some aged
herald accompany him, who may guide his mules and well-wheeled chariot,
and may bear back to the city the dead body which noble Achilles has
slain; nor let death at all be a cause of anxiety to his mind, nor at
all a terror; such a conductor, the slayer of Argus, will we give to
him, who shall lead him, until, directing, he shall place him beside
Achilles. But when he shall have conducted him into the tent of
Achilles, he will not kill him himself, and he will ward off all others;
for he is neither imprudent, nor rash, nor profane; but will very
humanely spare a suppliant man."

Thus he spoke; but wind-footed Iris rushed on, about to carry her
message. She came to [the palace] of Priam, and found wailing and
lamentation. His sons, sitting around their father within the hall, were
drenching their robes with tears; whilst the old man sat in the midst,
covered entirely[780] with a cloak; but much filth was around upon the
head and neck of the aged man, which, while rolling [on the ground], he
had abundantly collected[781] with his own hands. But his daughters and
daughters-in-law throughout the dwelling lamented, remembering those
who, many and brave, lay, having lost their lives by the hands of the
Greeks. Then the ambassadress of Jove stood beside Priam, and addressed
him in an under-tone; and tremor seized him as to his limbs:

"Take courage, O Dardanian Priam, in thy mind, nor fear at all; for
indeed I come not hither boding[782] evil to thee, but meditating good;
for I am an ambassadress from Jove to thee, who, though being far off,
greatly cares for and pities thee. The Olympian bids thee ransom noble
Hector, and bear presents to Achilles, which may melt his soul; thee
alone, nor let another man of the Trojans go with thee. But let some
aged herald accompany thee, who may guide thy mules and well-wheeled
chariot, and bring back to the city the dead which noble Achilles has
slain. Nor let death be a cause of anxiety to thy mind, nor fear at all
such a conductor; the slayer of Argus shall attend thee, who shall lead
thee, until, guiding, he shall bring thee near Achilles. But when he
shall have led thee into the tent of Achilles, he will not slay thee
himself, and he will ward off all others; for he is neither imprudent,
nor rash, nor profane; but will very humanely spare a suppliant man."

   [Footnote 780: I take έντυπὰς adverbially, with Eustathius, p.
   1474, and understand that he was "so completely enfolded, as to
   exhibit the entire contour of his person" (Kennedy), with the
   Schol. Hesych. t.i.p. 1264. Phavorinus, Suidas, and the Schol. on
   Appoll. Rh. 264. Ernesti well expresses the idea: "Ἐντυπὰς
   κεκαλυμμένος est, qui ita adstrinxit vestem, eique se involvit,
   ut tota corporis figura appareat, quod secus est in toga et
   pallio aut stola."]

   [Footnote 781: Literally, "reaped, cropped."]

   [Footnote 782: See Buttmann, Lexii. p. 445]

Thus having spoken, swift-footed Iris departed. But he ordered his sons
to prepare his well-wheeled mule-drawn chariot, and to tie a chest upon
it; but he descended into an odoriferous chamber of cedar, lofty-roofed,
which contained many rarities, and called in his wife Hecuba, and said:

"Unhappy one, an Olympian messenger has come to me from Jove, [that I
should] ransom my dear son, going to the ships of the Greeks, and should
bear gifts to Achilles, which may melt his soul. But come, tell this to
me, what does it appear to thee in thy mind? For my strength and courage
vehemently urge me myself to go thither to the ships, into the wide army
of the Greeks."

Thus he spoke: but his spouse wept, and answered him in words:

"Ah me, where now is thy prudence gone, for which thou wast formerly
distinguished among foreigners, and among those whom thou dost govern?
Why dost thou wish to go alone to the ships of the Greeks, before the
eyes of the man who slew thy many and brave sons? Certainly an iron
heart is thine. For if this cruel and perfidious man shall take and
behold[783] thee with his eyes, he will not pity thee, nor will he at
all respect thee. But let us now lament him apart,[784] sitting in the
hall; but [let it be] as formerly to him, at his birth violent fate spun
his thread, when I brought him forth, that he should satiate the
swift-footed dogs at a distance from his own parents, with that fierce
man, the very middle of whose liver I wish that I had hold of, that,
clinging to it, I might devour it; then would the deeds done against my
son be repaid; for he did not slay him behaving as a coward, but
standing forth in defence of the Trojan men and deep-bosomed Trojan
dames, neither mindful of flight nor of receding."

   [Footnote 783: A somewhat awkward inversion of the sense.]

   [Footnote 784: _I.e._ without the body of Hector being at hand.]

But her again the aged, godlike Priam addressed:

"Do not detain me, desirous to go, nor be thou thyself an evil-omen bird
in my palaces; nor shalt thou persuade me. For if indeed any other of
earthly beings had ordered me, whether they be prophets, soothsayers, or
priests, we might have pronounced it a falsehood, and been the more
averse. But now since I myself have heard it from a deity, and have
beheld her face to face, I will go, nor shall this word be vain and if
it be my fate to die at the ships of the brazen-mailed Greeks, I am
willing; for Achilles will forthwith, slay me, embracing my son in my
arms, after I have taken away the desire of weeping."

He spoke; and opened the beautiful lids of the chests, and took out
thence twelve beautiful mantles, twelve single cloaks, as many
tapestried rugs, and, in addition to these, as many tunics; and having
weighed it, he took out ten whole talents of gold. He took out beside
two glittering tripods, and four goblets, and a very beautiful cup,
which the Thracian men had given him when going on an embassy, a mighty
possession. Nor now did the old man spare even this in his palaces; for
he greatly wished in his mind to ransom his dear son. And he drove away
all the Trojans from his porch, chiding them with reproachful words:

"Depart, wretched, reproachful [creatures]; is there not indeed grief to
you at home, that ye should come fretting me? Or do ye esteem it of
little consequence that Jove, the son of Saturn, has sent sorrows upon
me, that I should have lost my bravest son? But ye too shall perceive
it, for ye will be much more easy for the Greeks to destroy now, he
being dead; but I will descend even to the abode of Hades, before I
behold with mine eyes the city sacked and plundered."

He spoke; and chased away the men with his staff; but they went out, the
old man driving [them]. He indeed rebuked his own sons, reviling
Helenus, Paris, and godlike Agathon, Pammon, Antiphonus, and Polites,
brave in the din of battle, Deïphobus, Hippothous, and renowned Dius. To
these nine the old man, reproaching, gave orders:

"Haste for me, O slothful children, disgraceful; would that you had all
been slain at the swift ships, instead of Hector. Ah me! the most
unhappy of all, since I have begotten the bravest sons in wide Troy; but
none of whom I think is left: godlike Mestor, and Troulus, who fought
from his chariot, and Hector, who was a god among men, for he did not
appear to be the son of a mortal man, but of a god. These indeed has
Mars destroyed to me; but all these disgraces remain, liars,
dancers,[785] most skilled in the choirs, and public robbers of lambs
and kids. Will ye not with all haste get ready my chariot, and place all
these things upon it, that we may perform our journey?"

   [Footnote 785: Cicero pro Muræna, vi., "Saltatorem appellat L.
   Murænam Cato Maledictum est, si vere objicitur, vehementis
   accusatoris." Cf. Æn. ix. 614.]

Thus he spoke; but they, dreading the reproach of their father, lifted
out the well-wheeled, mule-drawn chariot, beautiful, newly built, and
tied the chest[786] upon it. They then took down the yoke for the mules
from the pin, made of box-wood, and embossed, well fitted with rings,
and then they brought out the yoke-band, nine cubits in length, along
with the yoke. And this indeed they adjusted carefully to the pole at
its extremity, and threw the ring over the bolt. Thrice they lapped it
on either side to the boss; and when they had fastened, they turned it
evenly under the bend; then, bearing the inestimable ransoms of Hector's
head from the chamber, they piled them upon the well-polished car. Then
they yoked the strong-hoofed mules, patient in labour, which the Mysians
formerly gave to Priam, splendid gifts. They also led under the yoke for
Priam, the horses, which the old man himself had fed at the
well-polished manger. These indeed the herald and Priam yoked in the
lofty palace, having prudent counsels in their minds. But near them came
Hecuba, with sad mind, bearing sweet wine in her right hand, in a golden
goblet, in order that having made libations, they might depart. But she
stood before the steeds, and spoke, and addressed them:

"Take,[787] offer a libation to father Jove, and pray that thou mayest
return home again from the hostile men; since indeed thy mind urges thee
to the ships, I at least not being willing. But do thou pray now to the
dark, cloud-compelling Idæan son of Saturn, who looks down upon all
Troy; but seek the fleet bird, his messenger, which to him is the most
pleasing of birds, and whose strength is very great, on thy right hand,
so that, marking him thyself with thine eyes, thou mayest go, relying on
him, to the ships of the fleet-horsed Greeks. But if wide-viewing Jove
will not give thee his own messenger, I would not at all then, urging,
advise thee to go to the ships of the Greeks, though very eager."

   [Footnote 786: A kind of wicker hamper. Cf. Hesych. t. ii. p.
   921.]

   [Footnote 787: See ξ. 219]

But her godlike Priam answering, addressed:

"O spouse, certainly I will not disobey thee, advising this; for it is
good to raise one's hands to Jove, if perchance he may compassionate
me."

The old man spoke, and bade the attending servant pour pure water upon
his hands; for a handmaid stood by, holding in her hands a basin, and
also an ewer; and having washed himself, he took the goblet from his
wife. Then he prayed, standing in the midst of the enclosure, and poured
out a libation of wine, looking towards heaven; and raising his voice,
spoke:

"O father Jove, ruling from Ida, most glorious, most great, grant me to
come acceptable and pitied to [the tent] of Achilles; and send the swift
bird, thy messenger, which is the most agreeable of birds to thee, and
whose strength is very great, on my right hand; that I myself,
perceiving him with my eyes, may go, relying on him, to the ships of the
fleet-horsed Greeks."

Thus he spoke, praying; but to him provident Jove hearkened, and
immediately sent an eagle, the Black Hunter, the most certain augury of
birds, which they also call Percnos.[788] As large as the well-bolted,
closely-fitted door of the lofty-roofed chamber of a wealthy man, so
great were its wings on each side; and it appeared to them, rushing on
the right hand over the city. But they, having seen it, rejoiced, and
the soul was overjoyed in their bosoms. Then the old man, hastening,
mounted his polished car, and drove out of the vestibule and
much-echoing porch. Before, indeed, the mules drew the four-wheeled car,
which prudent Idæus drove; but after [came] the horses, which the old
man cheered on, driving briskly through the city with his lash; but all
his friends accompanied, greatly weeping for him, as if going to death.
But when they had descended from the city, and reached the plain, his
sons and sons-in-law then returned to Ilium. Nor did these two,
advancing on the plain, escape the notice of far-seeing Jove; but,
seeing the old man, he pitied him, and straightway addressed his beloved
son:

   [Footnote 788: See Alberti on Hesych. t. ii. pp. 622, 941;
   Villois on Apoll. Lex. p. 556.]

"O Mercury (for to thee it is peculiarly grateful to associate with man,
and thou hearest whomsoever thou art willing), go now, and so convey
Priam to the hollow ships of the Greeks, that neither any one may see
him, nor indeed any of the other Greeks perceive him until he reach the
son of Peleus."

Thus he spoke; nor did the messenger, the son of Argus. disobey.[789]
Immediately then he fastened under his feet his beautiful sandals,
ambrosial, golden, which carry him as well over the sea, as over the
boundless earth, with the blasts of the wind. He also took his rod, with
which he soothes the eyes of those men whom he wishes, and again excites
others who are asleep; holding this in his hands, the powerful slayer of
Argus flew along. But he immediately reached the Troad and the
Hellespont, and hastened to go, like unto a princely youth, first
springing into youth, whose youth is very graceful. And they, when they
had driven by the great tomb of Ilus, stopped their mules and horses,
that they might drink in the river; for even now twilight had come over
the earth. But the herald, spying, observed Mercury near, and addressed
Priam, and said:

   [Footnote 789: Compare Milton, P.L. v. 285, sqq., with Newton's
   note.]

"Beware, O descendant of Dardanus; this is matter for prudent thought. I
perceive a warrior, and I think that he will soon destroy us. But come,
let us fly upon our steeds; or let us now, grasping his knees, entreat
him, if he would pity us." Thus he spoke, but the mind of the old man
was confounded, and he greatly feared; but the hair stood upright on his
bending limbs. And he stood stupified; but Mercury himself coming near,
taking the old man's hand, interrogated, and addressed him:

"Whither, O father, dost thou this way direct thy horses and mules
during the ambrosial night, when other mortals are asleep? Dost thou not
fear the valour-breathing Greeks, who, enemies and hostile to thee, are
at hand? If any one of these should see thee in the dark and dangerous
night, bearing off so many valuables, what intention would then be
towards thee? Neither art thou young thyself, and this [is] an old man
who accompanies thee, to repel a warrior when first any may molest
thee. But I will not do thee injury, but will avert another from thee,
for I think thee like my dear father."

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then answered:

"Surely these things are as thou sayest, my dear son. But hitherto some
one of the gods has protected me with his hand, who has sent such a
favourable conductor to meet me, so beautiful art thou in form and
appearance. And thou art also prudent in mind, and of blessed parents."
But him again the messenger, the slayer of Argus, addressed: "O old man,
thou hast certainly spoken all these things with propriety. But come,
tell me this, and relate it truly; whither now dost thou send so many
and such valuable treasures amongst foreigners? Whether that these, at
least, may remain safe to thee? Or do ye all, now fearing, desert sacred
Ilium? For so brave a hero, was he who died, thy son; he was not in
aught inferior to the Greeks in battle."

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then answered:

"But who art thou, O best one, and of what parents art thou, who
speakest so honourably to me of the death of my luckless son?"

But him again the messenger, the slayer of Argus, addressed:

"Thou triest me, old man. and inquirest concerning noble Hector; whom I,
indeed, have very often beheld with mine eyes in the glorious fight,
when, routing the Greeks, he slew them at their ships, destroying [them]
with his sharp spear; but we, standing, marvelled; for Achilles, enraged
with the son of Atreus, did not permit us to fight. But I am his
attendant, and the same well-made vessel brought us. I am [one] of the
Myrmidons; Polyetor is my father, who, indeed, is rich, but now old as
thou. To him there are six sons, but I am his seventh; with whom casting
lots, the lot occurred to me to follow [Achilles] hither. And I came to
the plain from the ships, for at dawn the rolling-eyed Greeks will raise
a fight around the city. For they are indignant sitting quiet, nor can
the chiefs of the Greeks restrain them, longing for war."

But him then Priam, the godlike old man, answered:

"If indeed thou art one of the servants of Achilles, the son of Peleus,
come now, tell all the truth to me, whether is my son still at the
ships, or has Achilles, tearing him limb from limb, cast him to the
dogs?"

But him the messenger, the slayer of Argus, again addressed:

"O old man, neither have the dogs yet devoured him, nor the birds, but
he still lies at the ship of Achilles, in the same plight as before, at
his tents; and it is [now] the twelfth morning him lying, yet his body
is not at all putrid, nor do the worms devour him, which consume men
slain in battle. Doubtless he will drag him cruelly around the tomb of
his dear companion when divine morn appears; but he does not defile him.
Approaching, thou indeed thyself wouldst wonder how fresh[790] he lies,
while the blood is washed away from around, nor [is he] polluted in any
part. But all his wounds are closed, whatever were inflicted; for many
thrust a spear into him. Thus do the happy gods regard thy son, though
dead; for he was dear to them in their heart."

Thus he spoke; but the old man rejoiced, and answered in words:

"O son, surely it is good to give due gifts to the immortals, for my
son, while he was yet in being, never neglected the gods who possess
Olympus, in his palace; therefore are they mindful of him, although in
the fate of death. But come now, accept from me this beautiful goblet;
protect myself,[791] and, with the favour of the gods, conduct me until
I come into the tent of the son of Peleus."

   [Footnote 790: Literally, "dew-like," See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 791: Heyne prefers, "effect for me the ransom of the
   body," quoting Hesych., ῥύεσθαι, λοτρώσασθαι.]

But him the slayer of Argus again addressed: "Old man, thou triest me,
[being] younger; nor wilt thou now persuade me; thou who orderest me to
accept thy gifts unknown to Achilles; whom indeed I dread, and scruple
in my heart to plunder, lest some evil should afterwards come upon me.
Yet would I go as a conductor to thee even to renowned Argos,
sedulously, in a swift ship, or accompanying thee on foot; nor, indeed,
would any one contend with thee, despising thy guide."

Mercury spoke, and, leaping upon the chariot and horses, quickly took
the scourge and the reins in his hands, and breathed bold vigour into
the horses and mules. But when they had now reached the ramparts and
trench of the ships, then the guards were just employed about their
feast, and the messenger, the slayer of Argus, poured sleep upon them
all; and immediately he opened the gates and pushed back the bars, and
led in Priam, and the splendid gifts upon the car. But when they reached
the lofty tent of Achilles which the Myrmidons had reared for their
king, lopping fir timbers; and they roofed it over with a thatched roof,
mowing it from the mead, and made a great fence around, with thick-set
stakes, for their king: one bar only of fir held the door, which,
indeed, three Greeks used to fasten, and three used to open the great
fastening of the gates; but Achilles even alone used to shoot it. Then,
indeed, profitable Mercury opened it for the old man, and led in the
splendid presents to swift-footed Achilles; then he descended to the
ground, from the chariot, and said:

"O old man, I indeed come, an immortal god, Mercury, to thee; for to
thee my father sent me as companion. Yet shall I return indeed, nor be
present before the eyes of Achilles; for it would indeed be invidious
for an immortal god so openly to aid mortals. But do thou, entering,
clasp the knees of the son of Peleus, and supplicate him by his father,
and fair-haired mother, and his son; that thou mayest effect his mind."

Thus, indeed, having spoken, Mercury went to lofty Olympus; and Priam
leaped from his chariot to the ground, and left Idæus there: but he
remained, guarding the steeds and mules; while the old man went straight
into the tent, where Achilles, dear to Jove, was sitting. Himself he
found within; but his companions sat apart; but two alone, the hero
Automedon, and Alcimus, a branch of Mars, standing near, were
ministering to him (for, eating and drinking, he had just ceased from
food, and the table still remained); but great Priam, entering, escaped
his notice, and, standing near, he clasped the knees of Achilles with
his hands, and kissed his dreadful man-slaughtering hands, which had
slain many sons to him. And as when a dread sense of guilt has seized a
man, who, having killed a man in his own country, comes to another
people, to [the abode of] some wealthy man,[792] and stupor possesses
the spectators; so Achilles wondered, seeing godlike Priam; and the
others also wondered, and looked at one another. And Priam,
supplicating, spoke [this] speech:

   [Footnote 792: Probably for the purpose of purification,
   although, as has been before observed, Homer does not mention
   this. Compare my note on Æsch. Eum. p. 187, n. 5, and p. 187, n.
   1, ed. Bonn.]

"Remember thy own father, O Achilles, like unto the gods, of equal age
with me, upon the sad threshold of old age. And perhaps indeed his
neighbours around are perplexing him, nor is there any one to ward off
war and destruction. Yet he indeed, hearing of thee being alive, both
rejoices in his mind, and every day expects to see his dear son returned
from Troy. But I [am] every way unhappy, for I begat the bravest sons in
wide Troy, of whom I say that none are left. Fifty there were to me,
when the sons of the Greeks arrived; nineteen indeed from one womb, but
the others women bore to me in my palaces. And of the greater number
fierce Mars indeed has relaxed the knees under them; but Hector, who was
my favourite,[793] and defended the city and ourselves, thou hast lately
slain, fighting for his country; on account of whom I now come to the
ships of the Greeks, and bring countless ransoms, in order to redeem him
from thee. But revere the gods, O Achilles, and have pity on myself,
remembering thy father; for I am even more miserable, for I have endured
what no other earthly mortal [has], to put to my mouth the hand of a
man, the slayer of my son."

Thus he spoke; but in him he excited the desire of mourning for his
father; and taking him by the hand, he gently pushed the old man from
him. But they indeed, calling to mind, the one[794] wept copiously [for]
man-slaughtering Hector, rolling [on the ground] before the feet of
Achilles; but Achilles bewailed his father, and again in turn Patroclus;
and their lamentation was aroused throughout the house. But when noble
Achilles had satiated himself with grief, and the desire [for weeping]
had departed from his heart and limbs, immediately rising from his seat,
he lifted up the old man with his hand, compassionating both his hoary
head and hoary chin; and, addressing him, spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 793: Literally, "my only son."]

   [Footnote 794: Priam.]

"Alas! wretched one, thou hast certainly suffered many evils in thy
mind. How hast thou dared to come alone to the ships of the Greeks, into
the sight of the man who slew thy many and brave sons? Assuredly thy
heart is iron. But come now, sit upon a seat; and let us permit sorrows
to sink to rest within thy mind, although grieved; for there is not any
use in chill grief. For so have the gods destined to unhappy mortals,
that they should live wretched; but they themselves are free from
care.[795] Two casks of gifts,[796] which he bestows, lie at the
threshold of Jupiter, [the one] of evils, and the other of good. To whom
thunder-rejoicing Jove, mingling, may give them, sometimes he falls into
evil, but sometimes into good; but to whomsoever he gives of the evil,
he makes him exposed to injury; and hungry calamity pursues him over the
bounteous earth; and he wanders about, honoured neither by gods nor men.
So indeed have the gods given illustrious gifts to Peleus from his
birth; for he was conspicuous among men, both for riches and wealth, and
he ruled over the Myrmidons, and to him, being a mortal, they gave a
goddess for a wife.[797] But upon him also has a deity inflicted evil,
for there was not to him in his palaces an offspring of kingly sons; but
he begat one short-lived son; nor indeed do I cherish him, being old,
for I remain in Troy, far away from my country, causing sorrow to thee
and to thy sons. Thee too, old man, we learn to have been formerly
wealthy: as much as Lesbos, above the seat of Macar, cuts off on the
north, and Phrygia beneath, and the boundless Hellespont: among these, O
old man, they say that thou wast conspicuous for thy wealth and thy
sons. But since the heavenly inhabitants have brought this bane upon
thee, wars and the slaying of men are constantly around thy city. Arise,
nor grieve incessantly in thy mind; for thou wilt not profit aught,
afflicting thyself for thy son, nor wilt thou resuscitate him before
thou hast suffered another misfortune."

   [Footnote 795: This Epicurean sentiment is illustrated with great
   learning by Duport, pp. 140, sqq.]

   [Footnote 796: See Duport, pp. 142, sqq.]

   [Footnote 797: Catullus, lxii. 25: "Teque adeo eximie tædis
   felicibus aucte Thessaliæ columen Peleu, quoi Juppiter ipse, Ipse
   suos divûm genitor concessit amores."]

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then, answered:

"Do not at all place me on a seat, O Jove-nurtured, whilst Hector lies
unburied in thy tents; but redeem him as soon as possible, that I may
behold him with mine eyes; and do thou receive the many ransoms which we
bring thee; and mayest thou enjoy them, and reach thy father-land, since
thou hast suffered me in the first place to live, and to behold the
light of the sun."

But him swift-footed Achilles, sternly regarding, then addressed:

"Do not irritate me further, old man, for I also myself meditate
ransoming Hector to thee; for the mother who bore me, the daughter of
the marine old man, came as a messenger from Jove to me. And I perceive
thee also, O Priam, in my mind, nor do thou deceive me, that some one of
the gods has led thee to the swift ships of the Greeks; for a mortal
would not have dared to come into the camp, not even in very blooming
youth, for he could not have escaped the guards, nor indeed pushed back
the bars of our gates. Wherefore do not move my mind more to sorrows,
lest I leave thee not unharmed, old man, in my tents, though being a
suppliant, and violate the commands of Jove."

Thus he spoke; but the old man feared, and obeyed. But the son of Peleus
leaped forth, like a lion, from the door of the house, not alone; for
two attendants accompanied him, the hero Automedon, and Alcimus, whom
Achilles honoured most of his companions next after the deceased
Patroclus. These then unharnessed the horses and mules from the yoke,
and led in the clear-voiced herald of the old man, and placed him upon a
seat. They also took down from the well-polished car the countless
ransoms of Hector's head. But they left two cloaks and a well-woven
tunic, in order that, having covered the body, he might give it to be
borne home. But having called his female attendants, he ordered them to
wash and anoint all round, taking it apart, that Priam might not see his
son; lest, seeing his son, he might not restrain the wrath in his
grieving heart, and might arouse the soul of Achilles, and he might slay
him, and violate the commands of Jove. But when the servants had washed
and anointed it with oil, they then threw over him a beautiful cloak,
and a tunic; then Achilles himself, having raised him up, placed him
upon a litter, and his companions, together with [him], lifted him upon
the well-polished chariot. But he moaned, and called upon his dear
companion by name:

"O Patroclus, be not wrathful with me, if thou shouldst hear, although
being in Hades, that I have ransomed noble Hector to his beloved father,
since he has not given me unworthy ransoms. Besides even of these will I
give thee a share, whatever is just."

Noble Achilles spoke, and returned into the tent, and sat down upon a
well-made couch, whence he had risen, at the opposite wall, and
addressed Priam:

"Thy son is indeed redeemed to thee, as thou didst desire, and lies upon
a bier; and with the early dawn thou shalt behold him, conveying [him
away]: but now let us be mindful of the feast; for even fair-haired
Niobe was mindful of food, although twelve children perished in her
palaces, six daughters and six youthful sons; these indeed Apollo slew
with his silver bow, enraged with Niobe; but those, arrow-rejoicing
Diana, because, forsooth, she had compared herself with fair-cheeked
Latona. She said that [Latona] had borne [only] two, whereas she had
borne many; yet those, though being only two, destroyed all [her own].
Nine days indeed they lay in blood, nor was there any one to bury them,
for the son of Saturn had made the people stones; but upon the tenth day
the heavenly gods interred them. Still was she mindful of food, when she
was fatigued with weeping. Now, indeed, ever amidst the rocks, in the
desert mountains, in Sipylus, where, they say, the beds of the goddess
Nymphs are, who lead the dance around Acheloüs, there, although being a
stone, she broods over the sorrows [sent] from the gods. But come now, O
noble old man, let us likewise attend to food, but afterwards thou
mayest lament thy beloved son, conveying him into Troy; and he will be
bewailed by thee with many tears."

Swift Achilles spoke, and leaping up, slew a white sheep, and his
companions flayed it well, and fitly dressed it; then they skilfully cut
it in pieces, pierced them with spits, roasted them diligently, and drew
them all off. Then Automedon, taking bread, distributed it over the
table in beautiful baskets; whilst Achilles helped the meat, and they
stretched out their hands to the prepared victuals lying before them.
But when they had dismissed the desire of food and drink, Dardanian
Priam indeed marvelled at Achilles, such and so great; for he was like
unto the gods; but Achilles marvelled at Dardanian Priam, seeing his
amiable countenance, and hearing his conversation. When, however, they
were satisfied with gazing at each other, him Priam, the godlike old
man, first addressed:

"Send me now to rest as soon as possible, O Jove-nurtured, that we,
reclining, may take our fill of sweet sleep; for never have these eyes
been closed beneath my eyelids from the time when my son lost his life
by thy hands; but I ever lament and cherish many woes, rolling in the
dust within the enclosures of my palaces. But now I have tasted food,
and poured sweet wine down my throat; for before indeed I had not tasted
it."

He spoke; but Achilles ordered his companions, servants, and maids, to
place couches beneath the porch, and to spread beautiful purple mats on
them, and to strew embroidered carpets over them, and to lay on them
well-napped cloaks, to be drawn over all. But they went out of the hall,
having a torch in their hands, and hastening, they quickly spread two
couches. But the swift-footed Achilles, jocularly addressing him,[798]
said:

   [Footnote 798: "Achilles, in a mood partly jocular and partly
   serious, reminds Priam of the real circumstances of his
   situation, not for the sake of alarming him, but of accounting
   for his choosing the place he did for the couch of the aged
   king."--Kennedy.]

"Do you lie without, O revered old man, lest some counsellor of the
Greeks come hither, who, sitting with me, constantly meditate plans, as
is just. If any of these should see thee in the dark and dangerous
night, he would forthwith tell Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people,
and perchance there would be a delay of the redemption of the body. But
come, tell me this, and tell it accurately: How many days dost thou
desire to perform the funeral rites of noble Hector, that I may myself
remain quiet so long, and restrain the people?"

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then answered:

"If indeed thou desirest me to celebrate the funeral of noble Hector,
thus doing, O Achilles, thou dost surely gratify me. For thou knowest
how we are hemmed in within the city, and it is far to carry wood from
the mountain; and the Trojans greatly dread [to do so]. Nine days indeed
we would lament him in our halls, but on the tenth would bury him, and
the people should feast; but upon the eleventh we would make a tomb to
him, and on the twelfth we will fight, if necessary." But him
swift-footed Achilles again addressed:

"These things shall be to thee, O aged Priam, as thou desirest; for I
will prevent the fight as long a time as thou desirest."

Thus having spoken, he grasped the right hand of the old man near the
wrist, lest he should fear in his mind. They indeed, the herald and
Priam, slept there in the porch of the house, having prudent counsels in
their mind; while Achilles slept in the interior of the well-built tent;
and beside him lay fair-cheeked Brisëis.

The other gods indeed and chariot-fighting men slept all night, subdued
by gentle slumber; but sleep seized not Mercury, the author of good,
revolving in his mind how he should convey away king Priam from the
ships, having escaped the notice of the sacred gate-keeper. Accordingly
he stood over his head, and addressed him:

"O aged man, certainly evil is not at all a care to thee, that thou
sleepest thus amongst hostile men, after Achilles has suffered thee. Now
indeed thou hast ransomed thy beloved son, and hast given much; but the
sons left behind by thee would give three times as many ransoms for thee
alive, if Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, should know of thy being here,
and all the Greeks should know of it."

Thus he spoke; but the old man feared, and awoke the herald. Then for
them Mercury yoked the horses and mules, and quickly drove them himself
through the camp, nor did any one perceive. But when they reached the
course of the fair-flowing river, eddying Xanthus, which immortal Jove
begat, then indeed Mercury went away to lofty Olympus; and saffron-robed
Morn was diffused over the whole earth. They indeed drove the horses
towards the city with wailing and lamentation, and the mules bore the
body; nor did any other of the men and well-girdled women previously
perceive it; but Cassandra, like unto golden Venus, ascending Pergamus,
discovered her dear father standing in the driving-seat, and the
city-summoning herald. She beheld him also upon the mules, lying on the
litter; then indeed she shrieked, and cried aloud throughout the whole
city:

"O Trojans and Trojan women, going forth, behold Hector, if ever ye
rejoiced at his returning alive from battle; for he was a great joy to
the city, and to the whole people."

Thus she spoke; nor was there any man left in the city, nor woman; for
insupportable grief came upon them all, and they met him near the gates
bringing in the body. But his wife and venerable mother first rushing to
the well-wheeled chariot, plucked out their hair, touching his head; and
the crowd stood around, weeping. And they indeed would have wept the
whole day till sunset before the gates, lamenting Hector, had not the
old man addressed the people from his chariot:

"Give way to me, to pass through with the mules; but afterwards shall ye
be satiated with weeping, after I shall carry him home." Thus he spoke;
but they stood off. and made way for the chariot. But when they had
brought him into the illustrious palace, they laid him upon perforated
beds, and placed singers beside him, leaders of the dirges, who indeed
sang a mournful ditty, while the women also uttered responsive groans.
And amongst them white-armed Andromache began the lamentation, holding
the head of man-slaughtering Hector between her hands:

"O husband, young in years hast thou died, and hast left me a widow in
the palace. And besides, thy son is thus an infant, to whom thou and I,
ill-fated, gave birth; nor do I think he will attain to puberty; for
before that, this city will be overthrown from its summit. Certainly
thou, the protector, art dead, who didst defend its very self, and didst
protect its venerable wives and infant children; who will soon be
carried away in the hollow ships, and I indeed amongst them. But thou, O
my son, wilt either accompany me, where thou shalt labour unworthy
tasks, toiling for a merciless lord; or some one of the Greeks, enraged,
seizing thee by the hand, will hurl thee from a tower, to sad
destruction; to whom doubtless Hector has slain a brother, or a father,
or even a son; for by the hands of Hector very many Greeks have grasped
the immense earth with their teeth. For thy father was not gentle in the
sad conflict; wherefore indeed the people lament him throughout the
city. But thou hast caused unutterable grief and sorrow to thy parents,
O Hector, but chiefly to me are bitter sorrows left. For thou didst not
stretch out thy hands to me from the couch when dying; nor speak any
prudent word [of solace], which I might for ever remember, shedding
tears night and day."

Thus she spoke, bewailing; but the women also lamented; and to them in
turn Hecuba began her vehement lamentation:

"O Hector, far of all my sons dearest to my soul, certainly being alive
to me, thou wert beloved by the gods, who truly have had a care of thee,
even in the destiny of death. For swift-footed Achilles sold[799] all my
other sons, whomsoever he seized, beyond the unfruitful sea, at Samos,
Imbrus, and Lemnos without a harbour. But when he had taken away thy
life with his long-bladed spear, he often dragged thee round the tomb of
his comrade Patroclus, whom thou slewest; but he did not thus raise him
up. But now thou liest, to my sorrow, in the palaces, fresh[800] and
lately slain like him whom silver-bowed Apollo, attacking, has slain
with his mild weapons."

   [Footnote 799: See Grote, vol. i. p. 399.]

   [Footnote 800: See on ver. 419.]

Thus she spoke, weeping; and aroused a vehement lamentation. But to them
Helen then, the third, began her lamentation:

"O Hector, far dearest to my soul of all my brothers-in-law, for godlike
Alexander is my husband, he who brought me to Troy:--would that I had
perished first. But now already this is the twentieth year to me from
the time when I came from thence, and quitted my native land; yet have I
never heard from thee a harsh or reproachful word; but if any other of
my brothers-in-law, or sisters-in-law, or well-attired husband's
brothers' wives, reproached me in the palaces, or my mother-in-law (for
my father-in-law was ever gentle as a father), then thou, admonishing
him with words, didst restrain him, both by thy gentleness and thy
gentle words. So that, grieved at heart, I bewail at the same time thee
and myself, unhappy; for there is not any other in wide Troy kind and
friendly to me; but all abhor me."

Thus she spoke, weeping; and again the countless throng groaned. And
aged Priam spoke [this] speech amongst the people:

"O Trojans, now bring wood to the city, nor at all fear in your mind a
close ambuscade of the Greeks; for Achilles, dismissing me from the dark
ships, thus promised me, that he would not commence hostilities, before
the twelfth morning should arrive."

Thus he spoke; and they yoked both oxen and mules beneath the waggons;
and then assembled before the city. For nine days indeed they brought
together an immense quantity of wood; but when now the tenth morn,
bearing light to mortals, had appeared, then indeed, weeping, they
carried out noble Hector, and placed the body on the lofty pile, and
cast in the fire.

But when the mother of dawn, rosy-fingered Morn, appeared, then were the
people assembled round the pile of illustrious Hector. But after they
were assembled, and collected together, first indeed they extinguished
all the pyre with dark wine, as much as the force of the fire had
possessed; but then his brothers and companions collected his white
bones, weeping, and the abundant tear streamed down their cheeks. And,
taking them, they placed them in a golden urn, covering them with soft
purple robes, and forthwith deposited it in a hollow grave; and then
strewed it above with numerous great stones. But they built up the tomb
in haste, and watches sat around on every side, lest the well-greaved
Greeks should make an attack too soon. And having heaped up the tomb,
they returned; and then being assembled together in order, they feasted
on a splendid banquet in the palaces of Priam, the Jove-nurtured king.

Thus indeed they performed the funeral of steed-breaking Hector.



END OF THE ILIAD.


PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET, AND CHARING CROSS.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer (1873), by Homer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER (1873) ***

***** This file should be named 22382-0.txt or 22382-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/3/8/22382/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Rénald Lévesque and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
